# Saving the Appearances

## *A Study in Idolatry*

### Owen Barfield

# INTRODUCTION

There may be times when what is most needed is, not so much a new discovery or a new idea as a different ‘slant’; I mean a comparatively slight readjustment in our *way* of looking at the things and ideas on which attention is already fixed.

Draw a rectangular glass box in perspective—not too precise perspective (for the receding lines must be kept parallel, instead of converging)—and look at it. It has a front and a back, a top and a bottom. But slide your hand across it in the required direction and look again: you may find that what you thought was the inside of the top has become its outside, while the outside of the front wall has changed to the inside of the back wall, and vice versa. The visual readjustment was slight, for the box has not only turned inside out but is also lying at quite a different angle.

The book which follows has been written in the belief that it might be possible to slide a sort of hand across a good many of the things and ideas upon which the attention of western humanity has been concerned for the last two or three hundred years, and upon which the attention of the East is rapidly becoming fixed in the same way. The helping ‘hand’ which it has been sought to apply in this way is, simply, a *sustained* acceptance by the reader of the relation assumed by physical science to subsist between human consciousness on the one hand and, on the other, the familiar world of which that consciousness is aware.

Physical science has for a long time stressed the enormous difference between what it investigates as the actual structure of the universe, including the earth, and the phenomena, or appearances, which are presented by that structure to normal human consciousness. In tune with this, most philosophy—at all events since Kant—has heavily emphasized the participation of man’s own mind in the creation, or evocation, of these phenomena. The first three short chapters are largely devoted to reminding the reader of that difference and that participation.

About this conception of the relation between man and nature, which is wholly undisputed outside academic philosophy and largely undisputed within it, two things are noticeable; though they do not appear as yet to have been very widely noticed. One is an omission and the other an assumption.

In the first place, undisputed though it remains, it is (if we except a certain school of genetic psychology, now very much out of fashion) always left out of account is our approach to any subject outside the sphere of physics—such subjects, for example, as the history of the earth, the history of language, the history of thought. In the second place, it is invariably assumed that, whatever the truth may be about the psychological nexus between man and nature, it is an unchanging one and is the same now as it was when men first appeared on earth.

In this book it is suggested that the assumption arose in the first place through clearly traceable historical causes; that the evidence is in favour of regarding it as illusory; and that its persistence in spite of that evidence is largely due to the omission.

As to the omission: having established the gulf which yawns between the atomic physical structure of nature and the appearances of the familiar world, it is of course possible, it is certainly usual—if we are physicists, to continue undisturbed with our investigations of the unappearing atomic structure, and, if we are philosophers, to leave it at that, being content with the metaphysical curiosity we have produced. It is usual; but it is not really necessary to do so. We could, if we chose, take it seriously; we could keep the gulf steadily in sight, instead of instantly forgetting all about it again, and see what effect that has on our knowledge of other things, such as the evolution of nature and of man himself. Nor does this seem an unreasonable undertaking, since thesee are both matters, and the relation between them is a matter, to which the participation mentioned four paragraphs back must be at least relevant.

The greater part of this book consists, in fact, of a rudimentary attempt to remedy the omission. But this involves, as already indicated, challenging the assumption; and a good deal of attention has been devoted to that aspect also. The result—and really the substance of the book—is a sort of outline sketch, with one or two parts completed in greater detail, for a history of human consciousness; particularly the consciousness of western humanity during the last three thousand years or so.

Finally, the consequences which flow from abandoning the assumption are found to be very far-reaching; and the last three chapters are concerned, theologically, with the bearing of ‘participation’—viewed now as an historical process—upon the origin, the predicament, and the destiny of man.

# I<br/>THE RAINBOW

Look at a rainbow. While it lasts, it is, or appears to be, a great arc of many colors occupying a position out there in space. It touches the horizon between that chimney and that tree; a line drawn from the sun behind you and passing through your head would pierce the center of the circle of which it is part. And now, before it fades, recollect all you have ever been told about the rainbow and its causes, and ask yourself the question *Is it really there?*

You know, from memory, that if there were a hillside three or four miles nearer than the present horizon, The rainbow would come to earth in front of and not behind it; that, if you walk to the place where the rainbow ends, or seems to end, it would certainly not be ‘there’. In a word, reflection will assure you that the rainbow is the outcome of the sun, the raindrops and your own vision.

When I ask of an intelligible appearance or representation, Is it really there? I usually mean, Is it there independently of my vision? Would it still be there, for instance, if I shut my eyes—if I moved towards or away from it. If this is what you also mean by ‘really there’, you will be tempted to add that the raindrops and the sun are really there, but the rainbow is not.

Does it follow that, as soon as anybody sees a rainbow, there ‘is’ one, or, in other words, that there is no difference between an hallucination or a madman’s dream of a rainbow (perhaps on a clear day) and an actual rainbow? Certainly not. You were not the only one to see that rainbow. You had a friend with you. (I forbear asking if you both saw ‘the same’ rainbow, because this is a book about history rather than metaphysics, and these introductory chapters are merely intended to clear away certain misconceptions.) Moreover, through the medium of language, you are well aware that thousands of others have seen rainbows in showery weather; but you have never heard of any sane person claiming to have seen one on a sunless or a cloudless day. Therefore, if a man tells you he sees a rainbow on a cloudless day, then, even if you are convinced that he means what he says, and is not simply lying, you will confidently affirm that the rainbow he sees is ‘not there’.

In short, as far as being really there or not is concerned, the practical difference between a dream or hallucination of a rainbow and an actual rainbow is that, although each is a  representation or appearance (that is, something which I perceive to be there), the second is a *shared* or collective representation.

Now look at a tree. It is very different from a rainbow. If you approach it, it will still be ‘there’. Moreover, in this case, you can do more than look at it. You can hear the noise its leaves make in the wind. You can perhaps smell it. You can certainly touch it. Your senses combine to assure you that it is composed of what is called solid matter. Accord to the tree the same treatment that you accorded to the rainbow. Recollect all you have been told about matter and its ultimate structure and ask yourself if the tree is ‘really there’. I am far from affirming dogmatically that the atoms, electrons, nuclei, etc., of which wood, and all matter, is said to be composed, are particular and identifiable objects like drops of rain. But if the ‘particles’ (as I will here call them for convenience) *are* there, and are all that is there, then, since the ‘particles’ are no more like the thing I call a rainbow, it follows, I think, that—just as a rainbow is the outcome of the raindrops and my vision—so, a tree is the outcome of the particles and my vision and my other sense-perceptions. Whatever the particles themselves may be thought to be, the tree, as such, is a representation. And the difference, for me, between a tree and a complete hallucination of a tree is the same as the difference between a rainbow and an hallucination of a rainbow. In other words, a tree which is ‘really there’ is a collective representation. The fact that a dream tree differs in kind from a real tree, and that it is just silly to try and mix them up, is indeed rather literally a matter of ‘common sense’.

This background of particles is of course presumed in the case of raindrops themselves, no less than in that of trees. The relation, *raindrops: rainbows*, is a picture or analogy, not an instance, of the relation, *particles: representation*.

Or again, if anyone likes to press the argument still further and maintain that what is true of the drops must also be true of the particles themselves, and that there is ‘no such thing as an extra-mental reality’, I shall not quarrel with him, but I shall leave him severely alone; because, as I say, this is not a book about metaphysics, and I have no desire to demonstrate that trees or rainbows—or particles—are not ‘really there’—a proposition which perhaps has not much meaning. This book is not being written because the author desires to put forward a theory of perception, but because it seems to him that certain wide consequences flowing from the hastily expanded sciences of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and in particular their physics, have not been sufficiently considered in building up the general twentieth-century picture of the nature of the universe and of the history of the earth and man.

A better term than ‘particles’ would possibly be ‘the unrepresented’, since anything particular which amounts to a representation will always attract further physical analysis. Moreover, the atoms, protons and electrons of modern physics are now perhaps more generally regarded, not as particles, but as notional models or symbols of an unknown supersensible or subsensible base. All I seek to establish in these opening paragraphs is, that, whatever may be thought about the ‘unrepresented’ background of our perceptions, the *familiar* world which we see and know around us—the blue sky with white clouds in it, the noise of a waterfall or a motor-bus, the shapes of flowers and their scent, the gesture and utterance of animals and the faces of our friends—the world too, which (apart from the special inquiry of physics) experts of all kinds methodically investigate—is a system of collective representations. The time comes when one must either accept this as the truth about the world or reject the theories of physics as an elaborate delusion. We cannot have it both ways.

# II<br/>COLLECTIVE REPRESENTATIONS

A representation is something I percieve to be there. By premising that the everyday world is a system of collective representations, it may be thought that we blur the distinction between the fancied and the actual or, following the everyday use of language, between the apparently there and the really there. But this is not so. It only seems to be so because of the very great emphasis which—especially in the last three or four hundred years—the Western Mind has come to lay on the ingredient of spatial depth in the total complex of its perception. I shall return to this later.

As to what is meant by ‘collective’—any discrepancy between my representations and those of my fellow men raises a presumption of unreality and calls for explanation. If, however, the explanation is satisfactory; if, for instance, it turns out that the discrepancy was due, not to my hallucination, but to their myopia or their dullness, it is likely to be accepted; and then my representation may itself end by becoming collective.

It is, however, not necessary to maintain that collectivity is the *only* test for distinguishing between a representation and a collective representation (though, to creatures for whom insanity is round the corner, it is often likely to be the crucial one).

I am hit violently on the head and, in the same moment, perceive a bright light to be there. Later on I reflect that the light was ‘not really there’, even if I had lived all my life on a desert island where there was no-one to compare notes with, I might do as much. No doubt I should learn by experience to distinguish the first kind of light from the more practicable light of day or the thunderbolt, and should soon give up hitting myself on the head at sunset when I needed light to go on working by. In both cases I perceive light, but the various criteria of difference between them—duration, for instance, and a sharp physical pain, which the one involves and the other does not, are not difficult to apprehend.

What is required, is not to go on stressing the resemblance between collective representations and private representations, but to remember, when we leave the world of everyday for the discipline of any strict inquiry, that, *if* the particles, or the unrepresented, are in fact all that is *independently* there, then the world we all accept as real is in fact a system of collective representations.

Perception takes place by means of sense-organs, though the ingredient in it of sensation, experienced as such, varies greatly as between the different senses. In touch I suppose we come nearest to sensation without perception; in sight to perception without sensation. But the two most important things to remember about perception are these: *first*, that we must not confuse the percept with its cause. I do not hear undulating molecules of air; the name of what I hear is *sound*. I do not touch a moving system of waves or of atoms and electrons with relatively vast empty spaces between them; the name of what I touch is *matter*. *Second*, I do not perceive any *thing* with my sense-organs alone, but with a great part of my whole human being. Thus, I may say, loosely, that I ‘hear a thrush singing’. But in strict truth all that I ever merely ‘hear’—all that I ever hear simply by virtue of having ears—*is sound*. When ‘I hear a thrush singing’, I am hearing, not with my ears alone, but with all sorts of other things like mental habits, memory, imagination, feeling and (to the extent at least that the act of attention involves it) will. Of a man who merely heard in the first sense, it could meaningfully be said that ‘having ears’ (i.e., not being deaf) ‘he heard not’.

I do not think either of these two maxims depends on any particular theory of the nature of perception. They are true for any theory of perception I have ever heard of—with the possible exception of Bishop Berkeley’s. They are true, whether we accept the Aristotelian and medieval conception of form and matter, or the Kantian doctrine of the forms of perception, or the theory of specific sense-energy, or the ‘primary imagination’ of Coleridge, or the phenomenology that underlies Existentialism, or some wholly unphilosophical system of physiology and psychology. On almost any received theory of perception the familiar world—that is, the world which is apprehended, not through instruments and inference, but simply—is for the most part dependent upon the percipient.

# III<br/>FIGURATION AND THINKING

In the conversion of raindrops into a rainbow, or (if you prefer it) the production of a rainbow out of them, the eye plays a no less indispensable part than the sunlight—or than the drops themselves. In the same way, for the conversion of the unrepresented into a representation, at least one sentient organism is as much a *sine qua non* as the unrepresented itself; and for the conversion of the unrepresented into representations even remotely resembling our everyday world, at least one nervous system organized about a spinal cord culminating in a brain, is equally indispensable. The rainbow analogy does not imply, nor is it intended to suggest, that the solid globe is as insubstantial as a rainbow. The solid globe is solid. The rainbow is not. Only it is important to know what we mean by solidity. More than that, it is necessary to remember what we meant by solidity in one context, when we go on to use the word or think the thing in another.

It is easy to appreciate that there is no such thing as an unseen rainbow. It is not so easy to grasp that there is no such thing as an unheard noise. Or rather it is easy to grasp, but difficult to keep hold of. And this is still more the case, when we come to the sense of tough., Obvious as it may be to reflection that a system of waves or quanta or discrete particles is no more like solid matter than waves of air are like sound, or raindrops like a rainbow, it is not particularly easy to grasp, and it is almost impossible to keep in mind, that there is no such thing as unfelt solidity.¹ It is much more convenient, when we are listening for example to the geologist, to forget what we learnt about matter from the chemist and the physicist. But it really will not do. We cannot go on for ever having it both ways.

It may be expedient at this point to examine a little further the collective representations and our thinking about them. And it is clearly of little use to begin by asking what they are; since they are everything that is obvious. They are, for instance, the desk I am writing at, the noise of a door being opened downstairs, a Union Jack, an altar in a Church, the smell of coffee, a totem pole, the view from Malvern Hills, and the bit of brain-tissue that is being dissected before a group of students in a hospital laboratory. Some of them we can manipulate, as the lecturer is doing, and as I do when I move the desk. Some of them we cannot. What is important here is that there are, broadly speaking, three different things that we can do with all of them; or alternatively, they are related to the mind in three different ways.

First, we can simply contemplate or experience them—as when I simply look at the view, or encounter the smell. The whole impression appears then to be given to me in the representation itself. For I am not, or I am not very often, aware of smelling an unidentified smell and then thinking, ‘That is coffee!’ It appears to me, and appears instantly, that I smell coffee—though, in face, I can no more merely *smell* ‘coffee’ than I can merely *hear* ‘a thrush singing’. This immediate impression or experience of a familiar world has already been mentioned in Chapter II. It is important to be clear about it. It is plainly the result of an activity of some sort in me, however little I may recollect any such activity.

When a lady complained to Whistler that she did not see the world he painted, he is said to have replied: ‘No, ma’am, but don’t you wish you could?’ Both Whistler and the lady were really referring to that activity—which in Whistler’s case was intenser than the lady’s. Ought it to be called a ‘mental’ activity? Whatever it ought to be called, it really is the percipient’s own contribution to the representation. It is all *that* in the representation that is not sensation. For, as the organs of sense are required to convert the unrepresented (‘particles’) into sensations for us, so *something* is required in us to convert sensations into ‘things’. It is this something that I mean. And it will avoid confusion if I purposely choose an unfamiliar and little-used word and call it, at the risk of infelicity, *figuration*.

Now whether or no figuration is a mental activity, that is, a kind of thinking, it is clearly not, or it is not *characteristically*, a thinking *about*. The second thing, therefore, that we can do with the representations is to think about them. Here, as before, we remain unconscious of the intimate relation which they have, as representations, with our own organisms and minds. Or rather, more unconscious than before. For now our very attitude is, to treat them as independent of ourselves; to accept their ‘outness’ as self-evidently given; and to speculate about or to investigate their relations *with each other*. One could perhaps name this process ‘theorizing’ or ‘theoretical thinking’, since it is exactly what is done in most places where science is pursued, whether it be botany, medicine, metallurgy, zoology or any other. But I do not think the term is wide enough. The kind of thing I mean covers other studies as well—a good deal of history, for instance. Nor need it be systematic. There are very few children who do not do a little of it. Moreover, if a common word is chosen, there is the same danger of confusion arising from its occasional use with a less precise intention. Therefore, at the like hazard as before, I propose to call this particular kind of thinking *alpha-thinking*.

Thirdly, we can think about the *nature* of collective representations as such, and therefore about their relation to our own minds. We can think about perceiving and we can think about thinking. We can do, in fact, the kind of thinking which I am trying to do at the moment, and which you will be doing if you think I am right and also if you think I am wrong. This is part of the province of one or two sciences such as physiology and psychology, and of course it is also part of the province of philosophy. It has been called reflection or reflective thinking. But for the same reasons as before, I shall reject the simpler and more elegant term and call it *beta-thinking*.

It should be particularly noted that the distinction here made between alpha-thinking and beta-thinking is not one between two different *kinds* of thinking, such as for instance that which is sometimes made between analytical thinking on the one hand and synthetic or imaginative thinking on the other. It is purely a distinction of subject-matters.

The three operations—*figuration*, *alpha-thinking* and *beta-thinking*—are clearly distinguishable from one another; but that is not to say that they are divided by impassable barriers at the points where they mutually approach. Indeed the reverse is true. Moreover they may affect each other by reciprocal influence. In the history of the theory of colour, for instance, colour began by being regarded as a primary quality of the coloured object and was later transferred to the status of a ‘secondary’ quality dependent on the beholder. Here we can detect the interaction of alpha-thinking and beta-thinking; and again in the whole influence which experimental science has exerted on philosophy in the last two or three hundred years. This book, on the other hand, will be more concerned with the interaction between figuration and alpha-thinking.

That the former of these affects, and largely determines, the latter hardly needs saying; since the primary product of figuration is the actual subject-matter of most alpha-thinking. That the converse may sometimes also be true,k and further, that the borderline between the one and the other is sometimes quite impossible to determine—this is less obvious. Yet a little serious reflection (that is, a little beta-thinking) makes it apparent enough.

Recall for a moment the familiar jingle from *Sylvie and Bruno*, with its persistent refrain of ‘he thought he saw’ followed by ‘he found it was’:

>*He thought he saw a Banker’s Clerk<br/>Descending from the bus,<br/>He looked again and found it was<br/>A hippopotamus.<br/>etc., etc.*

This is of course only a very improbable instance of an experience which, in itself, is quite common, especially with those among our representation (and they form the overwhelming majority) which reach us through the sense of sight alone. When we mistake one representation, that is to say one thing, for another, so that there is a transition from an ‘I thought I saw’ to an ‘I found it was’, it is often very difficult indeed to say whether there is first a figuration (based, let us say, on incomplete sensation) and then another and different figuration, producing a different representation; or whether there is one and the same representation veiled from us at first by some incorrect afpha-thinking which is subsequently discarded as inapplicable. In the particular case of a puzzled man trying to descry an object spotted far off at sea, it feels more like the latter. Often it feels much more like the former. We have made the mistake before we are aware of having done any thinking at all.

Anyone who wishes to investigate this further should attend carefully to the sort of mistakes we are apt to make on awaking abruptly from deep sleep in a darkened room; expecially if it happens to be a strange room. Either way we must conclude that figuration, whether or no it is a kind of thinking, is something which easily and imperceptibly passes over into thinking, and into which thinking easily and imperceptibly passes over. For in both cases there was a representation; otherwise I should not have been deceived. And if the first representation was the result of incorrect thinking, then thinking can do something very much like what figuration does. Alternatively, if it was the result of figuration alone, then the very fact of that figuration can ‘make a mistake’ suggests that it has a good deal in common with thinking.

>¹’The thermometer is below freezing point, the pipe is cracked, and no water comes out of the tap. I know nothing about physics or chemistry; but surely I can say that there is solid ice in the pipe!’ Certainly you can; and if there was salt in the water, you can say that there is solid, *white* ice in the pipe. I am only pointing out that the solidity you are talking about involves your fancied touch, just as the whiteness involves your fancied glance. Only it is harder to remember.

# IV<br/>PARTICIPATION

In the last few decades this whole question of the figurative make-up of collective representations and theoretical confusion between what I have called figuration and what I have called alpha-thinking has been implicitly raised by certain anthropologists. Putting it in a nutshell, they have suggested, by the whole manner of their approach to the workings of the ‘primitive’ mind, the question: Can there be such a thing as, ‘*They* thought *they* saw?’

Of course, two people can make the same momentary mistake about the identity of an imperfectly seen object. But, as we saw in Chapter II, the generally accepted criterion of the difference between ‘I thought I saw’ and ‘I found it was’ is, that the former is a private, the latter a collective representation. How, then, if the ‘they’ are a whole tribe or population? If the ‘mistake’ is not a momentary but a permanent one? If it is passed down for centuries from generation to generation? If, in fact, it is *never* followed by a ‘they found it was’? The difficulty is, that then the ‘mistake’ is itself a collective representation. And yet for ourselves, as we saw, it is precisely the collectivity of our representations which is the accepted test of their reality. It is this which convinces us that they are *not* mistakes or hallucinations. Why not then also for them—the primative tribe? But this is to go too fast.

The earlier anthropologists assumed as a matter of course that the primitive peoples who still survive in various parts of the earth perceive and think in the same *way* as we do—but that they think incorrectly. The assumption which underlies their whole approach to the subject is effectively epitomized in two sentences from Tylor’s *Primitive Culture*, first published in 1871:

>It was no spontaneous fancy but the reasonable inference that effects are due to causes, which led the rude men of olden days to people with such ethereal phantoms their own houses and haunts and the vast earth and sky beyond. Spirits are personified causes.

This theory of an ‘inferring’ followed by a ‘peopling’, which is usually called ‘animism’, but which Durkheim prefers to call ‘naturism’, is moreover, according to L&#233;vy-Bruhl, especially typical of the English school of anthropology, and he attributes this, rightly or wrongly, to the influence of Herbert Spencer, who assumed so readily that all things evolve from simple to complex. Be that as it may, the theory is attacked by the twentieth-century anthropologists to whom I have referred. They deny the ‘inferring’ and question the ‘peopling’. L&#233;vy-Bruhl himself, for instance, insists, in the light of the evidence, that to ask how the primitive mind would ‘explain’ this or that natural phenomenon is a wrongly formulated question. The explanation is implied in the collective representations themselves. When we find a primitive mind incapable of grasping what is to us the self-evident law of contradiction, it is absurd to imagine such a mind thinking in terms of cause and effect, and of inference from the one to the other, Rather we are in contact with a different kind of thinking and a different kind of perceiving altogether. L&#233;vy-Bruhl describes this ‘prelogical mentality’, which he says is:

>essentially synthetic. By this I mean that the syntheses which compose it do not imply previous analyses of which the result has been registered in definite concepts, as is the case with those in which logical thought operates. In other words, the connecting links of the representations are given, as a rule, in the representations themselves.

This is also found to be a more satisfactory and convincing approach to the phenomenon of totemism, which involves the most inexplicable and, to us, nonsensical identifications and distinctions. To make no class-distinction between the sun and a white cockatoo, but to feel instantly and sharply a world of difference between both of these natural phenomena and a black cockatoo is, it is felt, a state of mind at which it would be difficult to arrive by inference. The elements which the totem-conscious mind selects out of the whole representation for *attention*, are often very very different from those which we select. Often, for instance, it is not much interested in the distinction between animate and inanimate (including artificial) objects.

>Almost everything that we see therein (i.e., in a being or object or natural phenomenon) escapes their attention or is a matter of indifference to them. On the other hand they see many things of which we are unconscious.

This leads L&#233;vy-Bruhl to the conclusion that ‘Primatives see with eyes like ours, but they do not perceive with the same minds’. And he adds:

>It is not correct to maintain, as is frequently done, that primitives associate occult powers, magic properties, a kind of soul or vital principle with all the objects which affect their senses or strike the imagination, and that their perceptions are surcharged with animistic beliefs. It is not a question of *association*. The mustic properties with which things are imbued form an integral part of the idea to the primitive who views it as a synthetic whole. It is at a later stage of social evolution that what we call a natural phenomenon tends to become the sole content of perceptions to the exclusion of other elements which then assume the aspect of beliefs, and finally appear superstitions. But as long as this ‘dissociation’ does not take place, perception remains an undifferentiated whole.

It may be questioned whether the epithet ‘mystic’, as it is used here, and in the expression ‘participation mystique’ which is especially associated with the name of L&#233;vy-Bruhl, adds effectively to his meaning. Elsewhere he has defined the precise significance which he intends by it, and I shall revert to this shortly. What is important is the concept of participation. The principal reason which L&#233;vy-Bruhl, Durkheim and others assign for the fact that primitives ‘do not perceive with the same minds’ as ours, is, that in the act of perception, they are not detached, as we are, from the representations. For us the only connection *of which we are conscious* is the external one through the senses. Not so for them. Thus, for L&#233;vy-Bruhl:

>The collective representations and interconnections which constitute such a (primitive) mentality are governed by the law of participation and in so far they take but little account of the law of contradiction.

He speaks of ‘a veritable symbiosis . . . between the totemic group and its totem’ and tells us that, if we seek to penetrate their mental processes, ‘We must understand “the same” by virtue, not of the law of identity, but of the law of participation’.

Durkheim seeks to carry much further the bearing of anthropological inquiry on the origin and evolution of abstract thought. He affirms, for instance, that the identification of persons and individual phenomena with totems violates the principle of contradiction only as predications¹ does in our own thinking. The root or predecessor of predictions is to be found in ‘the use of totemic emblems by clans to express and communicate collective representations’.

We shall see that this same expression and communication are to-day the function of *language*. ‘Participation’ begins by being an activity, and essentially a communal or social activity. It takes place in rites and initiation ceremonies resulting in

> collective mental states of extreme emotional intensity, in which representation is as yet undifferentiated from the movements and actions which make the communion towards which it tends a reality to the group. Their participation in it is so effectively *lived* that it is not yet properly imagines.

This stage is not only pre-logical, but also pre-mythical. It is anterior to collective representations themselves, as I have been using the term. Thus, the first development Durkheim traces is from symbiosis or active participation (where the individual feels he *is* the totem)² to collective representation of the totemic type (where the individual feels that his ancestors were the totem, that he will be when he dies, etc.). From this symbolic apprehension he then arrives at the duality, with which we are more familiar, of ideas on the one hand and numinous religion on the other.

This extra-sensory participation of the percipient in the representation involves a similar link between the representations themselves, and of course between one percipient and another. ‘Mana’ or ‘waken’ (which *we* can only translate by abstract terms like ‘totemic principle’, ‘life principle’ or—since it is present also in inanimate objests—’being’) is anterior to the individuality of persons and objects; these (says Durkheim) are rather apprehended by the very primitive as ‘stopping-places of mana’. It is, incidentally, here that he finds the prototype of the idea of *force*, which played such a prominent part in the physical science of the nineteenth century. And in emphasizing the ‘religious origin’ of this idea he points out, rather appositly, that Comte regarded the notion of force as a superstition, which was destined to disappear from science—as indeed ht has shown marked signs of doing, since Durkheim’s book was published.

I hope I have not misrepresented either of the two anthropologists from whom I have quoted rather freely. The more so, as I cannot pause to consider the adverse criticism which L&#233;vy-Bruhl in particular has aroused. (I doubt if it was his case that all primitives *invariably* think in a prelogical way. It is certainly not mine.) If I have drawn heavily on these two writers, I have done so by way of illustration rather than argument. It is not very difficult to see what they mean and, by seeing what they mean, the reader may possibly be helped to see what *I* mean.

Collective representations do not imply a collective unity distinct from the individuals comprising the social group. On the other hand their existence does not derive from the individual. In these two respects they may be compared to language. Like the words of a language, they are common to the members of a given social group, and are transmitted from one generation to another, developing and changing only gradually in the process.

Moreover it is impossible to draw a very precise line between representations and beliefs about representations, or, in the terms I have been using, between figuration and alpha-thinking. All collective representations involve figuration and therefore, if figuration is a kind of thinking, involve ‘thought’. But in addition to this nearly all of them involve elements which are actually *apprehended* as thought, or imagined, rather than as perceived. It was this presumably which persuaded L&#233;vy-Bruhl to add the word ‘mystic’ to his ‘participation’. He uses it, he says, ‘in the strictly defined sense in which “mystic” implies belief in forces and influences and actions, which though imperceptible to sense, are nevertheless real’.

When I see a stone fall to the ground, do I ‘believe’ that it is drawn by the force, or the law, of gravity? When I use the telephone, do I ‘believe’ that my correspondent’s voice is recorded and reproduced by an invisible called ‘electricity’? Or are both these thoughts immediately experienced in my representation? Or is one so and not the other? The exact point at which a piece of alpha-thinking has slipped into and become an integral part of the representation is hard to determine and may clearly differ somewhat between individuals of the same social group and for the same individual at different times. It is continually happening, while we are growing up, especially while we are learning to speak. I say I ‘hear a thrush singing outside my window’. But do I? He is invisible, and it might perhaps be a blackbird; I have begun the business of thinking and believing already! The same thing happens to a lifelong birdwatcher. He does no thinking at all. He *recognizes*. He hears a thrush singing. For him alpha-thinking has become figuration.

To sum up what has been said in this chapter: Anthropology began by assuming as a matter of course that primative peoples perceive the same phenomena as we do and on that assumption investigated their beliefs about those phenomens. Now however some anthropologists have begun to point out that the difference between the primitive outlook and ours begins at an earlier stage. It is not only a different alpha-thinking but a different figuration, with which we have to do, and therefore the phenomena are treatedas collective representations produced by that different figuration. It is further maintained by some of them that the most striking difference between primitive figuration and ours is, that the primitive involves ‘participation’; that is, an awareness which we no longer have, of an extra-sensory link between the percipient and the representation. This involves, not only that we think differently, but that the phenomena (collective representation) themselves are different. The first three chapters were devoted to reminding the reader that we do, in fact, still participate in the phenomena, though for the most part we do so unconsciously. *We* can only remind ourselves of that participation by beta-thinking and we forget it again as soon as we leave off. This is the fundamental difference, not only between their thinking and ours, but also between their phenomena and ours. It remains to consider how ours, which are genetically the later, have come to pass.

>The quotations from L&#233;vy-Bruhl in this chapter are mainly to be found in *Le Fonctions Mentales dans les Soci&#233;t&#233;s Inf&#233;rieures (English Translation: *How Natives Think). The quotations from Durkheim are all taken from *The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life*.

>¹*Predication* may be unconventionally, but not really inaccurately, defined as, ‘Whatever is done by the word *is* in such a sentence as: *a horse is an animal;* the earth is a planet’.

>²Anyone who finds it difficult to form any conception of participation, that is, of self and not-self identified in the same moment of experience, should reflect on that whole peculiar realm of semi-subjectivity which still leads a precarious existence under the name of ‘instinct’—or on those ‘irresistable’ impulses, on which psychiatrists are inclined to dwell. Many of us know what panic feels like, and ordinary men are proud of their sexual vigour or ashamed of the lack of it, although the act is readily acknowledged in retrospect to be at least as much something that is done to, or with, them by an invisible force of nature, as something they themselves veritably *do*.


# V<br/>PRE-HISTORY

A history of the ‘world’, as distinct from a history of the unrepresented, must clearly be a history of phenomena; that is, of collective representation. But before this part of the subject is approached, it will be well to consider briefly the bearing of this truth on what is sometimes called pre-history. I mean, in particular, the history of the earth before the appearance on it of human beings.

When particles of rain, rays of light and our watching eyes are appropriately disposed, we see a rainbow. In the same way, given the existence of the particles and the presence of human beings on the earth, there arise collective representations, or in other words the phenomena which we call ‘nature’. When dealing with times in which these conditions were present, therefore, it is quite reasonable to describe and investigate nature scientifically, not only in the manner of physics, but also in the manner of the sciences whose field of study is the past as well as the present, such as geology, ecology, zoology, and to do this *as if* the phenomena were wholly independent of man’s sensory and psychological participation. It is not necessarily misleading to do so, and it has proved to be of great practical use. It is however not sufficiently realized that different considerations apply to nay description, in familiar terms, of natural events and processes deemed to have taken place before the appearance of human life on the earth.

It may of course be contended (though I should not like the task) that some animals enjoy representations sufficiently coherent to set up a phenomenal whole, which could be called ‘a world’ or ‘nature’. But this does not really assist much. For, although animals appeared on earth before man, it is certainly not *their* world or nature which geology, for instance, describes; and even so there remains the whole vast panorama of pre-hostory which is assumed to have preceded the emergence on this planet of sentient life of any description.

Yet by combining, say, biology and geology and omitting physics and physiology, such descriptions are continually offered to us and form, I suppose, a recognized part of the education of most children to-day. It can do no harm to recall occasionally that the prehistoric evolution of the earth, as it is described for example in the early chapters of H. G. Wells’s *Outline of History*, was not merely never seen. It never occurred. Something no doubt occurred, and what is really being propounded by such popular writers, and, so far as I am aware, by the text-books on which they rely, is this. That at that time the unrepresented was behaving in such a way that, *if* human beings with the collective representations characteristic of the last few centuries of western civilization had been there, the things described whould also have been there.

This is not quite the same thing. It needs, I should have thought, to be considered in connection with another fact, namely, that wehn attention is *expressly* directed to the history of the unrepresented (as in calculations of the age of the earth based on radio-activity), it is invariably assumed that the behaviour of the unrepresented has remained fundamentally unchanged. Moreover (and this is, to my mind, more important), for those hypothetical ‘human beings with collective representations characteristic of the last few centuries of western civilization’ we might choose to substitute other human beings—those, for instance, who lived one or two or three or more thousand years ago. We should then have to write a different pre-history altogether. And we are not entitled to assume without inquiry that, as an indirect means of suggesting the truth about pre-historic boings-on in the unrepresented, such an alternative ‘model’ would be any less efficient than the one we have in fact chosen. It might be very much more so.

As these consequences may be startling enough to the reader to cause him to reject them, even though he has so far followed me with tympathy, I will, at the risk of repeating myself, put as clearly as I can the alternatives to accepting them. If we refuse to accept them, we can adopt one of three courses, to each of which there are, to me, insuperable objections. We can adopt a sort of super-na&#238;ve realism, rejecting all the rigmarole of physics, physiology and psychology with the healthy instinct of Dr. Johnson kicking his stone. ‘Nature is nature, and the earth is the earth, and always has been since it all began.’ This may do for the present moment, but for a scientifically reconstructed prehistoric past it is open to the objection that, if we are going to reject the reasoned inferences of one set of scientists, there seems no particular reason why we should accept those of another. Or we can resort frankly to ‘double-think’. We can think that what physics tells us is true, is true when we are studying physics, and untrue when we are studying something else. The objections to this course are obvious to me, and will be equally so to some of my readers. There are those who will nevertheless continue to adopt it. This book is addressed to the others. Lastly we can adopt a Berkeleyan view of phenomena. For Berkeley held that, not merely the unrepresented, but the representations *as such*, are sustained by God in the absence of human beings. This involves the, for me, too difficult corollary that, out of all the wide variety of collective representations which are found even to-day over the face of the earth, and the still wider variety which history unrolls before us, God has chosen for His delight the particular set shared by Western man in the last few centuries.

It does not of course necessarily follow that all the current descriptions of pre-history are absurd. Even if the usual way of recording what, in the absence of man, was going on in the unrepresented must be criticised as a dubious extrapolation, the descriptions may still, as I have suggested, but valuable, not as actual descriptions, but as notional ‘models’. What is important is, to remember that that is all they are. (Especially will this be the case, if we should ever have to assess the merits of this approach against those of any other possible way of acquiring knowledge of the pre-historic past.) For  their nature is that of artificial imagery. And when the nature and limitations of artificial images are forgotten, they become idols. Francis Bacon declared that the medieval approach to reality was under the spell of four different sorts of idols, which he called ‘idols of the cave’, ‘idols of the tribe’ and so forth. In the same way, these images of what was going on in the unrepresented in the pre-historic past may be called ‘idols of the study’. At least that is what they are, if their nature and limitations are forgotten. And I am not sure that as yet these have even been *noticed*.

It is, however, not only these purely theoretical or academic idols with which this book is concerned.

# VI<br/>ORIGINAL PARTICIPATION

It is characteristic of our phenomena—indeed it is this, above all, which distinguishes them from those of the past—that our participation in them, and therefore also their representational nature, is excluded from our immediate awareness.  It is consequently always ignored by our ‘common sense’ and sometimes denied even in theory. For this reason it will be best to begin the brief series of observations which I want to make upon the history of phenomena—that is, the history of the familiar world—from the present day, and to work backwards from there to the remoter past. Our first step, then, is to trace the last stage of this development, which has led up to the collective representation with which we are familiar to-day.

Participation is the extra-sensory relation between man and the phenomena. It was shown in Chapter III that the existence of phenomena depends on it. Actual participation is therefore as much a fact in our case as in that of primitive man. But we have also seen that we are unaware, whereas the primitive mind is aware of it. This primitive awareness, however, is obviously not the theoretical kind which *we* can still arrive at by beta-thinking. For that presupposes some acquaintance with the findings of modern physics and physiology and can only be applied to the kind of collective representations that go with this. The primitive kind of participation is indeed not theoretical at all, inasmuch as it is given in immediate experience. Let us distinguish it from ours by calling it ‘original’ participation. It would however be cumbersome to add the epithet every time the word is used and I propose very often to omit it, having first made it plain here and now that by ‘participation’ I shall mean *original participation*, unless the context otherwise requires.

There is another difference between sophisticated and primitive participation. Hitherto we have spoken of *representations* and of the *unrepresented*; but we have said nothing of any ‘represented’. This raises the question whether *representation* was the proper word to use at all, or whether it is merely misleading. If an appearance can properly be called a representation, it will certainly be a representation *of* something. Just as ‘the particles’, then (the name here chosen for all that is conceived to exist *independently* of consciousness), have also been called the *unrepresented*, so, whatever is *correlative* to the appearances or representations will here be called the *represented*. This is of course a mere name, and gives as yet no clue to the nature of what is meant. I hope that further light will be thrown upon it, gradually, as we proceed. Meanwhile I must use the name, leaving the reader to make up his mind, ambulando, whether it was justified or not.

We have seen that a very large part of the collective representations is found by beta-thinking to have been contributed by the percipient’s own activity. Beta-thinking therefore inevitably assumes that a very large part of their correlative, the *represented*, is to be found ‘within’ ourselves. Consequently if *our* participation, having been first understood and accepted, by beta-thinking, as a fact, should then become a conscious experience, it would have to take the form of conscious (instead of, as now, unconscious) figuration. This is because for us, the represented is conceived as within our percipient selves; and it is only an unrepresented physical base (‘particles’) which we conceive of as without. Not so for primitives. For them the represented, too, is conceived as outside, so that there is no question of conscious figuration. It may also sometimes be detected within, but it is detected primarily without. The human soul may be one of the ‘stopping places’ for *mana*, but what differentiates the primitive mind from ours is, that it conceives itself to be only *one* of those stopping-places and not necessarily the most significant. The essence of *original* participation is that there stands behind the phenomena, *and on the other side of them from me*, a represented which is of the same nature as me. Whether it is called ‘mana’, or by the names of many gods and demons, or God the Father, or the spirit world, it is of the same nature as the perceiving self, inasmuch as it is not mechanical or accidental, but psychic and voluntary.

I have here assumed that what L&#233;vy-Bruhl and Durkheim and their followers say about contemporary primitive man is substantially correct; and it seems to me likely to be so.¹ But whether or not it is correct for contemporary primitive man, it is certainly true of historically early man. All the evidence from etymology and elsewhere goes to show that the further back we penetrate into the past of human consciousness, the more mythical in their nature do the representations become. Moreover there is no evidence to the contrary. I shall say something later on of the testimony borne by etymology. Here it must suffice to affirm categorically that, for the nineteenth-century fantasy of early man first gazing, with his mind *tabula rasa*, at natural phenomena like ours, then seeking to explain them with thoughts like ours, and then by a process of inference ‘peopling’ them with the ‘aery phantoms’ of mythology, there just is not any single shred of evidence whatever.

I do not mean, by using the word ‘fantasy’, to imply  contempt. If great scholars like Max M&#168;ller and Sir James Frazer, in seeking for the historical origins of myth, made the same mistake as the early anthropologists, it will, I hope, become apparent in the course of this and the ensuing chapters how inevitable it was that they should do so. To-day, on the other hand, partly thanks to their work, any little man, provided he is not hopelessly prejudiced, can convince himself of the contrary. The point is, not to find someone to turn up our noses at, but to grasp that fact that alpha-thinking, when men first began to exercise it, had to be directed upon *that* kind of collective representation (namely the participated kind) and not on collective representations resembling ours, which (as we shall see) are a later product of that very alpha-thinking.

For alpha-thinking, as I have defined it, is a thinking *about* collective representations. But when we think ‘about’ anything, we must necessarily be aware of ourselves (that is, of the self which is doing the thinking) as sharply and clearly detached from the thing thought about. It follows that alpha-thinking involves *pro tanto* absence of participation. It is in fact the very nature and aim of pure alpha-thinking to exclude participation. When, therefore, it is directed, as it hast to be to start with, on phenomena determined by original participation, then, at first simply by being alpha-thinking, and at a later stage deliberately, it seeks to destroy that participation. The more so because (as we shall also see), participation renders the phenomena less predictable and less calculable.

The history of alpha-thinking accordingly includes the history of science, as the term has hitherto been understood, and reaches its culmination in a system of thought which only interests itself in phenomena to the extent that they can be grasped as independent of consciousness. This culmination appears to have been reached about the close of the nineteenth century. For, along with the recent tendency of physics to implicate the observer again in the phenomena, there goes the tendency of physicists to give up alpha-thinking about phenomena and occupy themselves, as mathmeticians, only with the unrepresented.

Systematic alpha-thinking appears to have begun with astronomy. Whether this was because the movements of the heavenly bodies display a regularity which is mostly lacking in sublunary phenomena, and which would be the first therefore to attract the attention of minds beginning for the first time to interest themselves in regularity, or whether it was for some other reason, we need not consider. Astronomy is generally regarded as the *doyen* of the sciences, and a glance at its history from Greek times to the present day or thereabouts will afford some insight into the development of that exact thinking about phenomena which is called science and the effect of that development on the collective representations of Western man. I say from Greek times because, although the Egyptians and Chaldeans appear to have kept astronomical records over a very long period, we know nothing of any avowedly *speculative* thought earlier than the Greeks either on this or on any other subject.

That the collective representations to which this speculative thought was applied were of the kind already indicated, i.e., participated, is obvious enough. Apart from speculative thought, it would never have occurred to an ancient Greek to doubt that the heavenly bodies and their spheres were in one way or another representations of divine beings. Such doubt was, in fact, voiced occasionally—simply because the Greek mind was of such an incorrigibly speculative nature that there was very little that did *not* occur to it—as a purely notional possibility. But the point is that, in the early days of alpha-thinking, any such notion was a secondary speculation, and rather a wild one, about collective representations whose character made the contrary, ‘representational’, view seem the obvious one.

The systematic alpha-thinking exercised only by the thoughtful few is applied to the phenomena, that is, to collective representations which they share with the many. And we are left in no doubt by Plato’s Dialogues, and by the whole language and literature of Greece, what these, in general, were like. There it was the materialist who looked like a Berkeley and the Greek equivalent of Dr. Johnson whoud return from speculation to common sense, not by kicking a stone, but by appealing to collective representations made obvious by his upbringing, by the language he spoke and heard spoken all around him, and by the active cults which were his daily matter of fact experience. Even the atoms of Democritus were, of course, not atoms, as the word has been understood in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. They were imagined as components of mind no less than of matter. In other words they were the only sort of atoms which alpha-thinking about participated phenomena *could* present to itself for the purpose of speculation.

It is in this light that we must approach, if we wish to understand them, not only the speculations of Plato, and Aristotle, for instance, on the nature of the stars and planets, but also the meanings of common words like *&nu;&omicron;&upsilon;&sigmaf;* (*nous*) and *&lambda;&omicron;&gamma;&omicron;&sigmaf;* (*logos*), and the whole apparatus of language by which they expressed these speculations. If we are content to translate, and to *think* ‘mind’ for *&nu;&omicron;&upsilon;&sigmaf;* and ‘reason’ or ‘word’ for *&lambda;&omicron;&gamma;&omicron;&sigmaf;*, we are in continual danger of surreptitiously substitution our own phenomena for those which they were in fact dealing with. It is not only that they speculated on whether the planets were ‘visible gods’ or only images of the gods, as statues are; on the nature of the Fifth Essence and its relation to the earthly elements; on the Anima Mundi; on whether or not the Aether, which is the substance of the spheres, has a soul, etc. The very meanings of the incidental words with the help of which they did the speculating, implied participation *of some sort*. Whereas the words into which we struggle to translate them imply the reverse. Some examples of these words will be considered in a later chapter, when it will be seen that original participation survived in an attenuated form even into the Middle Ages.

It may remove the risk of misunderstanding if I mention at this early stage that it is no part of the object of this book to advocate a return to original participation.

>¹ Compare, more recently, the last two talks in *The Institutions of Primitive Society* (A series of Broadcast Talks). Blackwell. 1954.

# VII<br/>APPEARANCE AND HYPOTHESIS

According to Plato there were three stages, or degrees of knowledge. The first and lowest amounted to no more than observation. Since all that we perceive is continually changing, coming into being and passing away, this kind of ‘knowledge’ grasps nothing permanent and nothing therefore which can properly be called ‘truth’. At the opposite pole, the highest degree—which is the only one that can *properly* be called knowledge—is wholly extra-sensory. It is the contemplation by pure intelligence of the divine ideas, and above all of the Supreme Good. The union of these two, that is, of pure intelligence and sense-knowledge, gives rise to an intermediate mental activity, which Plato stigmatized as ‘bastard’—although he insisted on all his pupils studying it as a preparation and a means to the true knowledge. This intermediate activity was geometry; or, as we should now say, mathematics.

These three degrees of knowledge correspond with three different levels of astronomy. The astronomy of observation merely records the movements of the stars, the sun, the moon and the planets, without attempting to account for them or reduce them to any system. From this we can rise to the second astronomy, which seeks to account for the apparently arbitrary movement of, for instance, the planets by supposing regular geometrical patterns to underlie them. By the exercise of this celestial geometry we can render ourselves capable of rising eventually to the third and highest, that is, to the only true knowledge; which is an unobscured participation in the divine Mind, or Word, itself. The real wisdom, as distinct from its not wholly unworthy outcome in the permanent truths of geometry, manifests itself only to him who participates in however slight a degree in the pure and divine Intelligence. This intelligent participation, the privilege of philosophy and in the last resort of initiation, was not mystical. For mystical experience is essentially other than ordinary experience. But the Platonic or Aristotelian participation, which was true knowledge, was simply the half-conscious participation of every man (the participation by virtue of which he *was* a man) cleared of the gross and bewildering mutability which is plastered over it by the other approaqch, through the senses.

Plato further laid it down orally, as we learn from later astronomers, that the science of astronomy proper lay within the middle one of these three spheres of knowledge. In the first place the ‘phaenomena’, or ‘appearances’, that is the apparent movements of the heavenly bodies, could be watched by observation. In the third place the true knowledge, since it was acquainted with the divine spirits who ensouled or guided the heavenly bodies, had already laid down certain fundamental principles. Later on, I shall say something of the ‘mental-spatial’ experience chich claimed to determine the nature of movement out of the nature of pure thought. It appears as a mere confusion to the alpha-thinking of today (although that, too, is beginning to talk without appreciable discomfort of ‘space-time’). Here it must suffice to record that the prescribed movements were, among other requirements, perfect circles at a constant speed.

There is perhaps more of physics than of astronomy in Aristotle’s *De Caelo*, but, as far as the three stages of knowledge and the fundamental principles just referred to are concerned, he was substantially in accord with Plato.

The ‘phenomena’ of which the astronomy of Greece and of the dark and middle ages spoke, were of course not quite what we to-day mean by ‘phenomena’, a word which, outside philosophy, has come to be practically sysnonymous with ‘objects’ and ‘events’. The middle voice of the Greek verb suggests neigher wholly ‘what is perceived, from within themselves, by men’ nor wholly ‘what, from without, forces itself on man’s senses’, but something between the two. This is also fairly suggested by the English word ‘appearances’, which is generally used in translating the once hard-worked phrase *&#963;&#969;&#958;&#949;&#953;&#957; &#964;&#945; &#966;&#945;&#953;&#957;&#959;&#956;&#949;&#957;&#945;*—‘to save the appearances’. This phrase, used by Simplicius in his sixth century *Commentary* on Aristotle’s *De Caelo*, continued to dominate astronomy down to the time of Copernicus.

When we hear of ‘saving appearances’ to-day, we are apt to think of a society hostess at a dinner party where something has gone wrong in the kitchen. It was not so in the seventeenth century. Although he spoke of God’s laughter, Milton was not *himself* laughing at the astronomers when he wrote in the Eighth book of *Paradise Lost*:

>*Or if they list to try<br/>Conjecture, he his fabric of the heavens<br/>Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move<br/>His laughter at their quaint opinions wide<br/>Hereafter, when they come to model heaven,<br/>And calculate the stars; how they will wield<br/>The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive,<br/>To save appearances; how gird the sphere<br/>With centric and eccentric scribbled o’er,<br/>Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.*

Nor was he suggesting that desperate expedients were being resorted to, in order to ‘save’ (in the sense of rescuing) the Ptolemaic system—which, incidentally, he had made the framework of his own poem. He was introducing a learned *clich&#233;*.

The same passage from Simplicius contains the Greek verb from which we derive the word ‘hypothesis’. The spheres and orbits by which the appearances were to be saved were normally ‘hypotheses’ in the strict sense of the word, that is, assumptions made for the purpose of a particular argument and by the same token not posited as true. A brief digression on the almost lost distinction between the word ‘hypothesis’ and the word ‘theory’ may not be amiss here. The Greek word *&#952;&#949;&#969;&#961;&#953;&#945;* (theoria) meant ‘contemplation’ and is the term used in Aristotle’s psychology to designate the moment of fully conscious participation, in which the soul’d *potential* knowledge (its ordinary state) becomes *actual*, so that man can at last claim to be ‘awake’. This is no guide to its present, or even recent meaning, but it does emphasize the difference between a proposition which it is hoped may turn out to be true, and a proposition, the truth or untruth of which is irrelevant. The geometrical paths and movements devised for the planets were, in the minds of those who invented them, *hypotheses* in the latter sense. They were arrangements—devices—for saving the appearances; and the Greek and medieval astronomers were not at all disturbed by the fact that the same appearances could be saved by two or more quite differenet hypotheses, such as an eccentric or an epicycle or, particularly in the case of Venus and Mercury, by supposed revolution round the earth or supposed revolution round the sun. All that mattered was, which was the simplest and the most convenient for practical purposes; for neither of them had any essential part in truth or knowledge.

Unless we realize, with the help of a little historical excavation of this kind, what from the epistemological point of view astronomy then signified and had signified for about two thousand years, we shall not understand the real signicance of Copernicus and Galileo. The popular view is, that Copernicus ‘discovered’ that the earth moves round the sun. Actually the *hypothesis* that the earth revolves round the sun is at least as old as the third century B.C., when it was advanced by Aristarchus of Samos, and he was neither the only, nor probably the first astronomer to think of it. Copernicus himself knew this. Secondly it is generally believed that the Church tried to keep the discovery dark. Actually Copernicus did not himself want to publish his *De Revoolutionibus Orbium*, and was only eventually prevailed on to do so by the importunity of two eminent Churchmen.

The real turning-point in the history of astronomy and of science in general was something else altogether. It took place when Copernicus (probably—it cannot be regarded as certain) began to think, and others, like Kepler and Galileo, began to affirm that the heliocentric hypothesis not only saved the appearances, but was physically true. It was this, this novel idea that the Copernican (and therefore any other) hypothesis might not be a hypothesis at all but the ultimate truth, that was almost enough in itself to constitute the ‘scientific revolution’, of which Professor Butterfield has written:

>it outshines everything since the rise of Christianity and reduces the Renaissance and Reformation to the rank of mere episodes, mere internal displacements, within the system of medieval Christendom.¹

When the ordinary man hears that the Church told Galileo that he might teach Copernicanism as a hypothesis which saved all the celestial phenomena satisfactorily, but ‘not as being the truth’, he laughs. But this was really how Ptolemaic astronomy had been taught! In its actual place in history it was not a casuistical quibble; it was the refusal (unjustified it may be) to allow the introduction of a new and momentous doctrine. It was not simply a new theory of the nature of the celestial movements that was feared, but a new theory of the nature of theory; namely, that, if a hypothesis saves all the appearances, it is identical with truth.²
them the last traces of original participation. In doing so he has produced the mechanomorphic collective representations which constitute the Western World today.

>The reader who wishes to verify, or investigate further, the arguments of this Chapter, should consult P. Duhem’s *Le Syst&#233;me du Monde. Histoire du doctrines cosmologiques de Platos &#224; Copernic*. Paris 1913-17. This monumental work, which combines German thoroughness with French lucidity, was unfortunately never finished. The author had completed fove (out of, I believe, eight) volumes before his death. The latest part of the period defined in the sub-title is, however, covered briefly in a series of articles by Duhem printed in *Annales de Ph&#237;loloph&#237;e Chr&#233;tienne (Apl.-Sept. 1908) under the title &#931;&#969;&#958;&#949;&#953;&#957; &#964;&#945; &#966;&#945;&#953;&#957;&#959;&#956;&#949;&#957;&#945;. Essai sur la Notion de Th&#233;orie Physique de Platon&#224; Galil&#233;e.*

>*Le Syst&#233;me du Monde* also gives a full historical account of refinements into which it would have been disproportionate for me to enter, such as the opposition of the more literal-minded Arabian astronomers to the Ptolemaic hypotheses (on the ground of their incompatibility with *Aristotelian* physics) and the epistemological distinction, at one time sharply emphasized, between the subject-matter of physics (sublunary phenomena) and astronomy (celestial phenomena).

>See also *Aquinas and Kant* by Gavin Ardley. Longmans Green & Co. 1950.

>¹*Origins of Modern Science*. Bell. 1949. Macmillan. 1941

>²Cr. Aquinas, *Summa*, 12. Qu. 32. 3. 1 ad 2. The other view was assumed by Ptolemy himself (*Almagest*, Bk. III, chaps. ii and iv; Bk. XIII, chap. ii). In the time of Copernicus it was still the official view, though not undisputed. See also Note at the end of this Chapter.

# VIII<br/>TECHNOLOGY AND TRUTH

We have just distinguished between the actual doctrines of modern science and the collective representation to which the growth of science has contributed. Thus, on the one hand attention may be directed to the history of alpha-thinking itself—what is ordinarily called the history of thought or the history of ideas. On the other hand it may be turned to the *effects* of an alpha-thinking which has continued long and widely enough to pass over into figuration, and be, as it were, smitten into the representations themselves; that is part of the history of *consciousness*, and of the collective representations which are its correlative. Now although my subject is not the doctrines of science, but rather the collective representations, which have been so deeply affected by the doctrines of science, it may be well to pause here for a moment and consider the relation of scientific theories to truth and knowledge.

What is the view taken by scientists themselves of that relation? The answer is not very clear. And it is a good deal less clear to-day than it was a generation ago. The limited scope of all scientific inquiry is to-day often emphasized rather strongly by those engaged in it. So much so, that when we have heard them on the subject, we are sometimes left with the feeling that we ought to look on all scientific theories as mere ‘hypotheses’ in the sense of the Platonic and medieval astronomers, and that it is wrong to take any of them with the ‘liberalness’ that embroiled Galileo with the Church. They are at best, we are assured, the mathematical formulae which up to the time of writing have been found the simplest and most convenient for—well, for saving the appearances. In physics in particular there is a marked tendency to treat almost as an *enfant terrible* anyone who takes the models literally enough to refer to them in any context outside that of physical inquiry itself.¹ It would seem to follow from this that, as Plato and the astronomers believed, scientific hypotheses have no direct relation to the real nature of things.

On the other hand I find something equivocal in the public utterances of the spokesmen of science. For the same ones who have just been stressing this unpretentious view of scientific theory will frequently let drop some such phrase as ‘some day we may know’—or even ‘we now know’—when speaking, not of some particular hypothesis, but of quite general conclusions about the nature of universe, earth, or man. Moreover, if the occasion is a formal one, we often get some reference to the history of science, in terms of ‘advancing the frontiers of knowledge’, and so forth. All this indicates a very different conception of science and strongly suggests to the audience that modern science, so far from being disentitled to claim the status of knowledge, is the only reliable knowledge available to us. At the least, it suggests that the findings of any particular science are not merely tools for the application and further pursuit of that science, but have some sort of absolute validity.

Perhaps the confusion is at present unavoidable, but let us at least be clear that it *is* a confusion between two quite incompatible views. Let us see, for instance, what consequences flow from adopting the first view, namely, that scientific theories are simply hypotheses to save the appearances. This can best be done with the help of a qrotesquely over-simplified analogy. But first let me make the bearing of the analogy clear. It will contrast two different sorts of ‘knowledge’, both of which, *in the analogy*, depend on alpha-thinking; but it will *illustrate* the difference between a ‘knowledge’ which does depend on alpha-thinking and a different kind of knowledge altogether which does not. Plato and Aristotle, and others, as we have seen, taught that there was such a knowledge  and that it was accessible only to participation. But it is not necessary to believe this in order to understand the analogy.

Take a clever boy, who knows nothing about the principle of internal combustion or the inside of an engine, and leave him inside a motor-car, first telling him to move the various knobs, switches and levers about and see what happens. If no disaster supervenes, he will end by finding himself able to drive the car. It will then be true to say that he knows *how to drive* the car; but untrue to say that he knows the car. As to that, the most we could say would be that he has an ‘operative’ knowledge of it—because for operation all that is required is a good empirical acquaintance with the dashboard and the pedals. Whatever we say, it is obvious that what he has is very different from the knowledge of someone else, who has studied mechanics, internal combustion and the construction of motor-cars, though he has perhaps never driven a car in his life, and is perhaps too nervous to try. Now whether or no there is another kind of knowledge of nature, which corresponds to ‘engine-knowledge’ in the analogy, it seems that, *if the first view of the nature of scientific theory is accepted*, the kind of knowledge aimed at by science must be, in effect, what I will call ‘dashboard-knowledge’.

Francis Bacon, whose startlingly original mind was so influential in bringing about the scientific revolution, was very frank about this. Not only did he maintain that knowledge was to be valued for the *power* it gives man over nature; but he practically made success in this aim a part of his definition of knowledge. The key words he uses to distinguish the knowledge he exalts from the knowledge pursued by the Schoomen are ‘fruit’ and ‘operation’. In other words, not only ‘science’ but knowledge itself, that is, the only knowledge that is not mere trifling, is, for him—technology. Knowledge (for which Bacon, when he wrote in Latin, of course used the word *scientia*) is that which enables us to make nature do our bidding.

I think it must be acknowledged that the ‘idea’ which stands behind the particular kind of knowledge which we have come to call ‘science’ is ‘dashboard-knowledge’. I mean only that that is its *mode* of ‘knowing’. I do not of course mean that the motive by which the great scientists have been inspired has been the desire for power. The analogy is admittedly a crude one. For, while the dashboard of even the most expensive and up-to-date car is a comparatively simple affair, nature’s ‘dashboard’—that is, her exterior, accessible to the senses and the reason—is of such a marvellous and intricate complexity that many a man has counted his life well spent in mastering a tiny corner of it.

If however it *is* acknowledged, what follows? If science is merely technology, if the theories of physics in particular are mere hypotheses to save the appearances, with no necessary relation to ultimate truth, then—well, in the first place, one hopes that the car will not break down. But, in the second place, it might be argued that they should be consistently treated as such. It might be said that the theories of physics should be reserved for the purposes of physics and left out of sight altogether, when we are thinking about anything else—about the nature of perception, for instance. This would remove the foundation from under the first part of this book. But it would also have so many other, and such startling consequences, that I am not seriously alarmed.

For, in the first place, we could not limit the new and more hypothetical way of thinking to nuclear, or recent physics. The laws of gravity, for example, and of intertia, must go the same way as the electrons, as far as any ultimate validity is concerned. Secondly, you cannot really isolate one science from others in this way, nor is it the practice to do so. One has only to think of the effects of physical theory, treated as fact, on the sciences of medicine and astronomy as exemplified in radio-therapy and astrophysics. Thirdly, and most important of all for my purposes, the hypotheses do in fact, get into the collective representations; many of them are, and others soon may be, implicit in the very ‘nature’ which surrounds us, and therefore in the world in which I have to write. And lastly the withdrawal from ‘participation’, which alpha-thinking has brought about, has its advantages. The vagaries of confusion and savagery in the tribes in which anthropology finds participation most conspicuously surviving to-day, though they may well not be very reliable guides to its ancient quality among other peoples who have long since abandoned it, do nevertheless remind us of the sins of commission in thought, feeling and action of which original participation is capable. Whatever sins of omission alpha-thinking may be guilty of, we owe to it, up to now, our independence, much of our security, our psychological integrity and perhaps our very existence as individuals. When Prospero renounced his last enchantments and set sail for civilization, Ariel, it is true, remained with Caliban—but so did Setebos.

Apart from all this, there is one conclusive reason why, in spite of the technological slant of natural science, our beta-thinking is bound to *begin* with the assumption that alpha-thinking has a valid relation to truth. With collective representations like ours, what else can we do? Where else can we start from? If the physical theory of an unrepresented base *has* some such validity, so much the better. If not—even if it amounts to positive error—the way out may still lie through and not back. The best way of escape from deep-rooted error has often proved to be, to pursue it to its logical conclusion, that is, to go on taking it seriously and see what follows. Only we must be consistent. We must take it *really* seriously. We must give up double-think. For inconsistent and slovenly thought can abide indefinitely in error without any feeling of discomfort.

>¹Anyone, it has been said, may ask questions concerning wave-mechanics; but only cads talk about ‘ether’!

# IX<br/>AN EVOLUTION OF IDOLS

It is the common opinion that, whereas we see nature pretty much as she really is, primitive man sees and archaic or early man saw her all awry through the veil of a complicated system of fancies and beliefs. If, however, the general conclusions of Chapter IV are accepted, it is clear that, whether or no archaic man saw nature awry, what he saw was not primarily determined by *beliefs*. On the other hand it was suggested in Chapter VII that what *we* see *is* so determined. If I am right therefore, there is indeed a contrast between primitive and modern consciousness and that contrast *is* connected with beliefs, but in exactly the opposite way to what is generally supposed. Precisely what beliefs about phenomena have been widely and confidently and long enough held to become actually part of a representation, is, as I have said, a matter on which opinions may well differ in any particular case. But, whether they are part of our collective representations or not, it is a fact that there are certain beliefs not only about the structure, but also about the history, of the phenomena surrounding them, which are widely, indeed almost universally, shared by civilized men in this second half of the twentieth century. There are also beliefs, only a little less confidently and a little less universally held, about the history of consciousness. As both these sets of beliefs run sharply counter to a good deal of what I have said and intend to say on the same subject, it will be well to give some indication of how and why these (in my view) mistaken beliefs arose.

But first of all, one more brief digression on the subject of science. Most of what I have said about it has connoted the experimental and practical category. Whether the theories of physics and astronomy, for instance, are truths or approximate truths, or whether they are mere hypotheses to save the appearances, the impressibe thing about them is that they work. We predict the result of an experiment, we make the experiment, with all adequate safeguards, and the prediction is verified. In the case of astronomy, although we cannot experiment, we can still predict and, in doing so, test the efficiency of our hypotheses.

>They predict many years ahead eclipses of the sun and moon; they specify the day, the hour and the extent; and their reckoning is correct—the events follow their predictions; they have discovered and recorded rules, by which it can be foretold in what year, in what month of the year, on what day of the month, at what hour of the day, in what part of their light the sun and moon are to be eclipsed; and what is foretold occurs.

These words are of course not less, but much more true of the Copernican and Newtonian hypotheses of to-day than they were of the Ptolemaic and contemporary hypotheses to which St. Augustine was referring when he wrote them in his *Confessions*¹ at about the end of the fourth century A.D. By their ‘fruits’, as Bacon would have said, we know them.

But there are to-day, alongside the practical and experimental sciences, a number of others which are, it seems to me, in a much less happy position. I suppose a large part of astrophysics, for example, to be unverifiable by any prediction or experiment; but I am concerned here more with sciences such as paleontology and a good part of geology and zoology, whose subject-matter is the past, which naturally cannot be predicted and is not either susceptible of experiment. Here we cannot say, with Bacon, ‘never mind what those tedious old fools, the Schoolmen, meant by “knowledge”; does it deliver the goods?’ For the only goods to be delivered *are*—knowledge. There is no ‘operation’, no ‘fruit’ and no emperical test of accuracy. If *their* hypotheses are not also the actual truth, they are nothing.

It seems to me that the only thing which such purely theoretical sciences really have in common with those at the technological end of the scale, is the healthy *discipline*, the open-minded attitude to fact which is, or should be, common to all whose object is knowledge, and which has itself become so much better understood and acknowledged as a result of the systematic pursuit of empirical science. But it also seems to me that they have in fact borrowed very much more than this. They have for instance accepted many of the hypotheses of sister sciences as established facts, according to them the same status in the construction of their theories as to their own first-hand observation. In this connection I have already pointed out in Chapter V that they have accepted *some* of these hypotheses, while choosing to ignore others. They have moreover borrowed half the vocabulary of hypothesis and empirical verifications and are deeply coloured by the technological mode of knowledge which that implies, though it is really quite inappropriate to them. It is almost as if they expected dashboard-knowledge to tell us how the engine was made. I believe this to be one of the reasons, though not the most important one, for the hypothetical picture of the evolution of the earth and man which began at about the end of the eighteenth century to fasten itself on men’s minds and which is to-day regarded by ordinary men (as are all but the most recent and avowedly tentative of scientific hypotheses) as palpable fact; which indeed, it may be argued, has become part of their collective representations.

At the beginning of the eighteenth century the variety of natural species was normally attributed by the botany and zoology of the day to supernatural and instantaneous creation. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries witnessed the almost total disappearance of this tradition, reflected as it was in the elaborately classifying botany of Linnaeus, in favor of a gradual ‘evolution’. In the record of the rocks and the dovetailed panorama of organic nature, history and science together gradually divined the vestiges of a different, a ‘natural’ kind of creation, and one that was the reverse of instantaneous. Nature herself came to be seen as a process in time and the individual phenomena at any moment, instead of being fixed and parallel shapes repeated and repeated since creation’s day, were cross-sections of their own development and metamorphosis. They could be truly grasped only by looking before and after. A consideration of the incidental effecct of this on our whole conception of the significance of history, and indeed of time itself, must be deferred to a later chapter. Suffice it here to say that the upheaval was all the greater—indeed it amounted in the end to something like an explosion—because it came at a time when the mind of Europe was perhaps more disinclined to look *forward* than at any other time in its history. The backward-looking mood of the Revival of Learning had not yet died away and most men were much less concerned with the shape of things to come than with the greatness and wisdom of the ancient Greeks and Romans and the virtues of the noble savage, corrupted (it was held) by the advance of civilization.

In this chapter we are concerned with the form which the hypothesis ultimately took and its effect on the collective representations. this was naturally determined to a large extent by the existing representations to which it was applied. What were the phenomena of nature at the time when the new doctrine began to take effect, and particularly at the Darwinian moment in the middle of the nineteenth century? They were *objects*. They were unparticipated to a degree which has never been surpassed before or since. The habit, begun by the scientific revolution, of regarding the mechanical model constructed by alpha-thinking as the actual and exclusive structure of the universe, had sunk right into them. Hardy’s rustics may indeed remind us that change did not proceed everywhere at the same rate even in the English-speaking world; but for townsmen at least—in a world which was already rapidly and is now more rapidly still becoming totally urbanized—the last flicker of medieval participation had died away. Matter and force were enough. There was as yet no thought of an unrepresented base; for if the particles kept growing smaller and smaller, there would always be bigger and better glasses to see them through. The collapse of the mechanical model was not yet in sight, nor had any of those other factors which have since contributed to the passing of the dead-centre of ‘literalness’—idealist philosophies, genetic psychology, psycho-analysis—as yet begun to take effect. Consequently there was as yet no dawning apprehension that the phenomena of the familiar world may be ‘representations’ in the final sense of being the mental construct of the observer. Literalness reigned supreme.

What then had alpha-thinking achieved at precisely this point in the history of the West? It had temporarily set up the appearances of the familiar world (which the same thinking, pursued a little farther—pursued to the point which I have called ‘beta’—discovers to be so inextricably involved with man himself) as things wholly independent of man. It had clothed them with the independence and extricsicality of the unrepresented itself. But a representation, which is collectively mistaken for an ultimate—ought not to be called a representation. It is an idol. Thus the phenomena *themselves* are idols, when they are imagined as enjoying that independence of human perception which can in fact only pertain to the unrepresented. If that is, for the most part, what our collective representations are to-day, it is even more certainly what they were in the second half of the nineteenth century. And it was to *these* collective representations that the evolutionists had to apply their alpha-thinking, just as it was to the quite different representations of their own contemporaries that Plato and Aristotle had to apply theirs. Is it to be wondered at that the evolution which the former have depicted is not a real evolution of phenomena at all, but, as was pointed out in Chapter V, a factitious extrapolation—an evolution of ‘idols of the study’?

I am speaking of course of the form which the theory finally took, not of the concept of evolution itself. That is factual enough. The record of the rocks *is* a script containing stored memories of earth’s past. It is only a question of how the script is to be read. A touch of that participation which still linked the Greeks, and even the medieval observer with his phenomena, might well have led to a very different interpretation—as it did in the case of Goethe, who had that touch. But for the generality of men, participation was dead; the only link with the phenomena was through the senses; and they could no longer concieve of any manner in which either growth itself or the metamorphoses of individual and special growth, could be determined from within. The appearances were idols. They had no ‘within’. Therefore the evolution which had produced them could only be conceived mechanomorphically as a series of impacts of idols on other idols.

If the impulse to construe as process the record of the rocks and the vestiges of creation apparent in the natural order had come either a little earlier, before participation had faded, or a little later, when the iconoclasm implicit in physical analysis—and in the beta-thinking to which it can give rise—had really begun to work, man might have read there the story of the coming into being, *pari passu*, of his world and his own consciousness. As it was, all that palaeontology could take over from the experimental sciences, such as astronomy and physics, was the idols which those latter had so far succeeded in creating. Working with these, it attempted moreover to adopt the orthodox ‘geometrizing’ tradition of those sciences with a slavishness that led, in one instance at least, to results whose absurdity is only just beginning to dawn on us.

There is no more striking example than the Darwinian theory of that borrowing from the experimental by the non-experimental sciences, to which I referred at the beginning of this chapter. It was found that the appearances on earth so much lack the regularity of the appearances in the sky that no systematic hypothesis will fit them. But astronomy and physics had taught men that the business of science is to find hypotheses to save the appearances. By a hypothesis, then, these earthly appearances must be saved; and saved they were by the hypothesis of—chance variation. Now the concept of chance is precisely what a hypothesis is devised to save us from. Chance, in fact, = no hypothesis. Yet so hypnotic, at this moment in history, was the influence of the idols and the special mode of thought which had begotten them, that only a few—and their voices soon died away—were troubled by the fact that the impressive vocabulary of technological investigation was actually being used to denote its breakdown; as though, because it is something we can do with ourselves in the water, drowning should be included as one of the different ways of swimming.

>¹Bk. V, ch. iii.

# X<br/>THE EVOLUTION OF PHENOMENA

I shall have succeeded very poorly with the opening chapters of this book, if I have not succeeded in making one thing plain. It is only necessary to take the first feeble step towards a renewal of participation—that is, the bare acknowledgement in beta-thinking that phenomena are collective representations—in order to see that the actual evolution of the earth we know must have been at the same time an evolution of consciousness. For consciousness is correlative to phenomenon. Any other picture we may form of evolution amounts to no more than a symbolical way of depicting changes in the unrepresented. Yet curiously enough, as already observed, this latter kind of evolution is just what is assumed *not* to have taken place. We look at a fossil-bearing rock and prove how things have changed by describing appearances which can never have appeared, unless there was at the same time consciousness. We fix the date of those appearances, and exclude the possibility of consciousness, by measuring the radio-active content of the rock, on the footing that the behaviour of the unrepresented has remained unchanged for millions of years.

By treating the phenomena of nature as objects wholly extrinsic to man, with an origin and evolution of their own independent of man’s evolution and origin, and then by endeavouring to deal with these objects as astronomy deals with the celestial appearances or physics with the particles, nineteenth-century science, and nineteenth-century speculation, succeeded in imprinting on the minds and imaginations of men their picture of an evolution of idols. One result of this has been to distort very violently our conception of the evolution of human consciousness. Or rather it has caused us virtually to deny such an evolution in the face of what must otherwise have been accepted as unmistakable evidence.

For the biological picture of evolution was imprinted, no less deeply than on other men’s, on the minds of those scholars—etymologists, mythologists, anthropologists—who made it their business to study the human past, and it was accepted by them, not as speculation or hypothesis, but as established fact. It was treated as part of the appearances they were setting out to save. Consequently, in their endeavours to explain the mind of early or of primative man, they set him down, in fancy, in front of phenomena identical with their own, but with his mind *tabula rasa*, and supposed the origin of human consciousness to lie in his first efforts to speculate about those phenomena. In this was was evolved the doctrine of ‘animism’, according to which the fancy of primitive man had ‘peop;ed’ nature with spirits. Now, in order that nature may be peopled with spirits, nature must first be devoid of spirit; but this caused the scholars no difficulty, because they never supposed the possibility of any other kind of nature. The development of human consciousness was thus presented as a history of alpha-thinking beginning from zero and applied always to the same phenomena, at first in the form of erroneous beliefs about them and, as time went on, in the form of more and more correct and scientific beliefs. In short, the evolution of human consciousness was reduced to a bare history of ideas. No doubt the history of consciousness does include the story of any number of erroneous beliefs, but the erroneous beliefs of human beings about phenomena are neither the most interesting nor the most important thing about the numan beings or about the phenomena.

It may be objected that what I have recounted in the last three chapters is itself very like a history of ideas and beliefs. This is quite true. It had to be what it was, because I wished to begin by showing how our *present* collective representations arose, and it is just a fact that these are determined by ideas and beliefs rather than—as is the case with participating consciousness—productive of them. At the same time it does raise an important question. Granted that for the past two or three thousand years the process of evolution has consisted in the gradual ousting of participation by alpha-thinking, is even the history of alpha-thinking itself just a history of thought in the ordinary sense, or can we also detect in it the subliminal working of an evolutionary process? A history of thought, as such, amounts to a dialectical or syllogistic process, the thoughts of one age arising discursively out of, challenging, and modifying the thoughts and discoveries of the previous one. Is this all we mean by the history of alpha-thinking?

The evidence points in the opposite direction. Many indications suggest that, in addition to the dialectical history of ideas, there are forces at work beneath the threshold of argument in the evolution even of modern consciousness. Go far enough back and it is obvious. The comparatively sudden appearance, after millenia of static civilizations of the oriental type, of the people or the impulse which eventually flowered in the cultures of the Aryan nations can hardly have been due to the impact of notion on notion. And the same is true of the abrupt emergence at a certain point in history of vociferously speculative thought among the Greeks. Still more remarkable is the historically unfathered impulse of the Jewish nation to set about eliminating participation by quite other methods than those of alpha-thinking. Suddenly, and as it were without warning, we are confronted by a fierce and warlike nation, for whom it is a paramount moral obligation to refrain from the participatory heathen cults by which they were surrounded on all sides; for whom moreover precisely that moral obligation is conceived as the very foundation of the race, the very marrow of its being. We owe to the Jews the pejorative significance in the word *idol*. The representative images, the totemic *eidola*, which ritually focused the participation of the surrounding Gentile nations, are either condemned by their prophets as evil, or denied as unrealities; as when the Psalmist sings:

>*Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of men’s hands.<br/>They have mouths, and speak not: eyes have they, and see not.<br/>They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, and smell not.<br/>They have hands, and handle not: feet have they, and walk not: neither speak they through their throat.*

To this I shall return later.

But even when we come to the last seven-leagued step in the development of our modern mechanomorphic consciousness, which occurred at a time when alpha-thinking was already far advanced, we are forced to the same conclusion. Why should the scientific revolution have occurred when it did, and at no other time, although men had been busy saving the appearances by abstract hypotheses for century after century? We might be tempted to answer this question by saying that it came when alpha-thinking had succeeded in developing more efficient instruments of observation, so that observation of the phenomena themselves became at last a viable and more attractive alternative to the traditional medieval practice of merely glossing Aristotle. The scientific revolution, it is often suggested, came about because men began at last to look at nature for themselves and see what happened; and we are referred to Galileo’s telescope and Jupiter’s moons. But this will hardly suffice. For although post-Copernican astronomy certainly was based on more and better first-hand observation than the old astronomy, yet in the case of physics, as Professor Butterfield has pointed out, it was the other way about. A very long step—and a very difficult one—was taken in the final ousting of participation, when the Aristotelian and medieval doctrine that all bodies come to rest, unless they are kept in motion by a ‘mover’, was at last abandoned. Yet if we base our hypotheses on the behaviour of the bodies we actually see in motion, this is the only conclusion we can possibly come to. The theory of ‘impetus’, which later developed into the concept of ‘inertia’, requires, not observation, but the abstract, geometrizing supposition, never realized in practice—at least on earth—of bodies moving through a gravity-free, frictionless vacuum. In this case therefore the change of outlook—and there could hardly be a more significant one—must have been hindered rather than helped by observation.

No. Although alpha-thinking is itself dialectical, I do not think it can be convincingly maintained that the historical development of alpha-thinking is a purely dialectical process. The evidence in such matters is naturally not of the sort that can be measured with a slide-rule or broken with a hammer, but it does not require all that fineness of perciption to discern *behind* the evolution of consciousness the operation of forces beneath its threshold. There is some internal evidence, too. Men concerned with the development of any branch of thought, if they happen also to be acutely conscious of the workings of their own minds, are sometimes surprised at the ease and the force with which ideas tending in a certain direction have come into them. They have been known to speak, not without a kind of bewilderment, of certain thoughts being ‘in the air’. The following passage from the *Autobiography* of John Stuart Mill appears to record just such an experience:

>What thus impressed me was the chapter in which Bentham passed judgment on the common modes of reasoning in morals and legislation, deduced from phrases like ‘law of nature’, ‘right reason’, ‘the moral sense’, ‘natural rectitude’, and the like and characterized them as dogmatism in disguise, imposing its sentiments upon others under cover of sounding expressions which convey no reason for the sentiment, but set up the sentiment as its own reason. . . . *The feeling rushed upon me*, that all previous moralists were superseded, and that here indeed was the commencement of a new era in thought.

The italics are mine, but the sentiments are those of that least excitable of men, John Stuart Mill. I quote them only because of the strong feeling I had, when I read them, that here, where one would most of all expect the development of thought to be simply the process of its own discourse, something else was going on underneath it. We must defer until nearer the end of any consideration of what that something may be.

# XI<br/>MEDIEVAL ENVIRONMENT

When the distinction has been appreciated between (1) an imputed evolution of some wholly ‘objective’, and therefore wholly unrepresented base, (2) a fancied evolution of idols, and (3) the actual evolution of phenomena (including, as that does, a correlative evolution of consciousness), we may be compelled to revise some of our ideas on the amount of time required for the process. It follows, for instance, from what was said in Chapter V, that the period during which the *phenomenal* earth has been evolving is probably much shorter than is now generally assumed. Another consequence is, that evolutionary changes are not purely biological, and that they are not limited to pre-history, but can be detected even in the relatively recent period for which historical records, or indications of some sort, are still available to us. They include changes subtler in their nature and observable over a different time-scale altogether, changes measurable by centuries rather than millennia, and by millennia rather than aeons.

It has already been suggested that the last of these changes occupied only the three or four hundred years which divide our own epoch from the one which preceded the scientific revolution. For this suggestion was implied throughout, in the attempt which was made in Chapter VI and VII to trace the coming into being of our own collective representations. It is now the task of this book to demonstrate in rather more detail, if that be possible, that the men of the middle ages, and their predecessors, did indeed live in a different world from ours. The difficulties in the way of such a demonstration are very great, because, as I have pointed out, it is the very nature of our own representations that they are fixed, as a sort of idols to which all representative significance is denied, and which cannot therefore (so it is felt) have altered merely with the alteration of human consciousness. Since it is, for us, a matter of ‘common sense’, if not of definition, that phenomena are wholly independent of consciousness, the impulse to ignore or explain away any evidence to the contrary is almost irresistable.

Yet, as with most inveterate prejudices, the reward of overcoming it requites the exertion. The idols are tough and hard to crack, but through the first real fissure we make in them we find ourselves looking, how deeply, into a new world! If the eighteenth-century botanist, looking for the first time through the old idols of Linnaeus’s fixed and timeless classification into the new perspective of biological evolution, felt a sense of liberation and light, it can have been but a candle-flame compared with the first glimpse we now get of the familiar world and human history lying together, bathed in the light of the evolution of consciousness.

That, in a colloquial or metaphorical sense, the man of the middle ages lived in ‘a different world’ from ours, is obvious enough from the record. Half an hour spent with the illuminated manuscripts in the British Museum would be enough to convince anyone of this, even if there were no cathedrals, no Mystery plays, no frescoes, no heraldry, no psychomachies, no Virgil legend, no Divine Comedy still surviving. But we have here not merely to notice the fact that medieval man expressed himself in so different a manner and in such different terms from those which are natural to us, but to ask the question *why* he did so. Besides producing representations in perception and memory, men reproduce them in their language and are; it is, indeed, in this way that the representations become collective. Through language and traditional art we come without effort to share in the collective representations of our own age and our own community. But where we are concerned with those of an alien or a vanished community, we cannot bring ourselves to the point of sharing them without making an unwonted effort. We have to try to experience them as vitally *as if* they were ours—but our own keep on getting in the way.

The first obvious impression which the art and literature of the Middle Ages make upon us is one of ‘quaintness’—that quaintness which disgusted the eighteenth and fascinated the nineteenth century. If we go farther and ask in what this quaintness consists, I think we shall find that it arises, above all, from their combining and, as we should say, confusing two ways of approaching phenomena; ways which we are accustomed to regard as quite distinct from one another. These are the literal, on the one hand, and the symbolic or metaphorical, on the other. In their art, for instance, they felt none of the awkwardness we do about representing invisible or spiritual events and circumstances by material means. The same human figures, costumes, artefacts, etc., could be used in the same picture or carving as literal reproductions of the physical world and as representations of a spiritual world. A farm cart would do for Elijah’s fiery chariot on its way up to heaven—and look at any fresco of the Last Judgment.

In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries men who wanted to paint or sculpt an angel, for instance, or a departed spirit, felt obliged to supply him with a special, unearthly costume—often rather like a nightgown. But *then* there seemed nothing incongruous in using the garments of every day. Certainly, in both periods, angels were often represented with wings, but this really only emphasizes the difference—for they would add wings to the ordinary human figure ordinarily attired, whereas it would clearly be aesthetically impossible and theologically a joke in bad taste to attach wings to a lounge suit. It may be suggested that there is a very simple explanation, namely that lounge suits are ‘prosaic’, whereas armour, tabards and hose are not. But this is no explanation at all, unless we can also say what we mean by ‘prosaic’, and therefore *why* our clothes are prosaic, whereas medieval clothes were not. If we cannot, then we are merely left with another form of the same statement. A prosaic object, in other words, is a non-representational one; and our clothes are prosaic, because our minds are literal.

It is very important to realize that, when it is said that the man of medieval and earlier times confused the literal and symbolical approach, what is meant is, that he confused or rather combined the two states of mind *which we to-day mean by those words*. Indeed, we shall find throughout that the main difficulty that prevents us from breaking through the idols to the actuality of history, that is, to the evolution of consciousness, lies in the fact that we go on using the same words without realizing how their meanings have shifted. Thus, exceptional men did sometimes distinguish between the literal and the symbolical use of words and images before the scientific revolution. On the question of hell, for instance, John Scotus Erigena distinguished in the ninth century between the symbol and the symbolized or the representation and the represented , emphasizing that the sufferings of hell are purely spiritual, and that they are described physically for the benefit of simple understandings. The point I am making is that, precisely to those simple understandings, the ‘physical’ and ‘literal’ themselves were not what ‘physical’ and ‘literal’ are to us. Rather, the phenomena themselves carried the sort of multiple significance which we to-day only find in symbols. Accordingly, the issue, in a given case, between a literal and a symbolical interpretation, though it could be raised, had not the same sharpness as of contradictories. Later, as the representations hardened into idols, the distinction between the two grew sharper and sharper until, in the nineteenth century, the strain of a ‘literal’ interpretation became intolerable even to simple understandings, and the notion of, for instance, a ‘physical’ hell was decisively rejected as an impossible superstition. And so indeed it is, if by ‘physical’ we mean the idols of which our physical world to-day consists. ‘Who now believes,’ inquired F. C. Conybeare in 1910, ‘in a God who has a right and a left hand?’¹

When the ‘things’ of the physical world have become idols, then indeed the literal interpretation excludes the symbolical, and *vice versa*. But where every thing is a representation, at least half-consciously experienced as such, there is as yet no such contradiction. For a representation experienced as such is neither literal nor symbolical; or, alternatively, it is both at the same time. Nothing is easier for us, than to grasp a purely literal meaning; and if we are capable at all of grasping, in addition, a symbolical or ‘fancy’ meaning, as we do in poetry, we are in no danger of confusing the one with the other.² Before the scientific revolution, on the other hand, it was the concept of the ‘merely literal’ that was difficult. And therefore the writer who is referred to as Dionysius the Areopagite, and Thomas Aquinas and others after him, emphasized the importance of using the humblest and most banal images, as symbols for purely spiritual truths or beings. For only in this way could a representation be safely polarized into symbol and symbolized, into literal and metaphorical.

We have seen that phenomena are experienced collectively *as* representations, and not as idols, where there is a survival of participation. In attempting to show that, right down to the period which ended with the scientific revolution, there was such a survival, I can do no more than give a few selected indications. The reader must go elsewhere for a full and detailed account of the medieval outlook.

Since participation is a *way* of experiencing the world in immediacy, and not a system of ideas about experience, or about the world, we obviously shall not find any contemporary *description* of it. When we come to contemporary philosophy and theories of knowledge, we shall indeed find explicit *references* to participation, but for the moment we are concerned with the ordinary man’s experience and not with what philosophers thought about that experience. Contemporary books were written, and contemporary science was expounded, for people assumed to share the collective representations of the writer, and accordingly our evidence must be sought more often in what is implied or assumed than in what is actually affirmed. We can only reconstruct the collective representations of another age obliquely.

Let us make the attempt for a moment. Let us try to place ourselves inside the skin of a medieval ‘man in the street’, and imagine ourselves looking out at the world through his eyes and thinking about it—not speculating, but thinking ordinary habitual thoughts—with his mind. We are not concerned with what he believed as an obligation of faith or a point of doctrine remote from experience. We are concerned with the sort of thing he took for granted.

To begin with, we will look at the sky. We do not see it as empty space, for we know very well that a vacuum is something that nature does not allow, any more than she allows bodies to fall upwards. If it is daytime, we see the air filled with light proceeding from a living sun, rather as our own flesh is filled with blood proceeding from a living heart. If it is night-time, we do not merely see a plain, homogeneous vault pricked with separate points of light, but a regional, qualitative sky, from which first of all the different sections of the great zodiacal belt, and secondly the planets and the moon (each of which is embedded in its own revolving crystal sphere) are raying down their complex influences upon the earth, its metals, its plants, its animals and its men and women, including ourselves. We take it for granted that those invisible spheres are giving forth an inaudible music—the spheres, not the individual stars (as Shakespeare’s Lorenzon instructed Jessica, much later, when the representation had already begun to turn into a vague superstition). As to the planets themselves, without being specially interested in astrology, we know very well that growing things are specially beholden to the moon, that gold and silver draw their virtue from sun and moon respectively, copper from Venus, iron from Mars, lead from Saturn. And that our own health and temperament are joined by invisible threads to those heavenly bodies we are looking at. We probably do not spend any time thinking about these extra-sensory links between ourselves and the phenomena. We merely take them for granted.

We turn our eyes to the sea—and at once we are aware that we are looking at one of the four elements, of which all things on earth are composed, including our own bodies. We take it for granted that these elements have invisible constituents, for, as to that part of them which is incorporated in our own bodies, we experience them inwardly as the four ‘humours’ which go to make up our temperament. (To-day we still catch the lingering echo of this participation, when Shakespeare makes Mark Antony say of Brutus:

>*. . . The elements<br/>So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up<br/>And say to all the world, This was a man.*)

Earth, Water, Air and Fire are part of ourselves, and we of them. And through them also the stars are linked with our inner being, for each constellated Sign of the Zodiac is specially related to one of the four elements, and each element therefore to three Signs.

A stone falls to the ground—we see it seeking the centre of the earth, moved by something much more like desire than what we to-day call gravity. We prick our finger and a drop of red blood appears. We look at the blood . . . but for the moment I will not pursue this any further. The reader who is at all acquainted with the productions of the medieval mind, its alchemy, its medicine, its herb-lore, its bestiaries, and so forth, can do it better for himself. For the reader who is not so acquainted there are the libraries—better still, there are those inexhaustible encyclopedias in stone, the cathedral carvings.

Whatever their religious or philosophical beliefs, men of the same community in the same period share a certain background-picture of the world and their relation to it. In our own age—whether we believe our consciousness to be a soul ensconced in a body, like a ghost in a machine, or some inextricable psychosomatic mixture—when we think *casually*, we think of that consciousness as situated at some point in space, which has no special relation to the universe as a whole, and is certainly nowhere near its centre. Even those who achieve the intellectual contortionism of denying that there is such a thing as consciousness, feel that this denial comes from inside their own skins. Whatever it is that we ought to call our ‘selves’, our bones carry it about like porters. This was not the background picture before the scientific revolution. The background picture then was of man as a microcosm within the macrocosm. It is clear that he did not feel himself isolated by his skin from the world outside him to quite the same extent as we do. He was integrated or mortised into it, each different part of him being united to a different part of it by some invisible thread. In his relation to his environment, the man of the middle ages was rather less like an island, rather more like an embryo, than we are.

>¹*Myth, Magic and Morals*.

>²The meaning, for instance, of the word *garden* in the line: *There is a garden in her face*, is unlikely to be mistaken for the literal meaning.

# XII<br/>SOME CHANGES

In the first chapter of this book it was pointed out that our collective representations compose, not only the world of everyday experience, but also the world which (apart from the special case of physics) is investigated by the sciences. Science did not, of course, betin with the scientific revolution. But in the time before that had done its work, the world with which science had to deal was not that of our own day, but a world of the kind sketched in the last chapter. If, to take only one instance, we look at the theories concerning the blood and its circulation which prevailed before Harvey, we can at once see from their whole character that they represent the application of alpha-thinking to representations quite other than our own. The background-picture of man as microcosm at the centre of the world as macrocosm was more than a background-picture for science. There, and in particular in their chemistry, which we should now call alchemy, that picture became explicit as theory. And where it was not explicit, it was still implied. But it went further than this. Just as for us evolution, for instance, besides being both a background-picture and an explicit theory, has spread itself as a way of thinking, far beyond the confines of biology; or as mechanism has passed from physics into chemistry and physiology; so the medieval background-picture, of a reciprocal participation between man and the elements by which he was surrounded, influenced other sciences besides alchemy. Thus, in medicine, the heart was the central organ, occupying something the same position in the microcosm of man, as did man himself in the macrocosm. It drew the blood into itself, in order to replenish it with *pneuma* or ‘vital spirits’, after which the blood passed of its own motion back again into the system of the body. Instead of a circulation, there were two different kinds of blood; the arterial, whose function has just been described, and which contained those vital spirits to which we still unknowingly refer when we speak of ‘high’ or ‘low’ spirits; and the venous, which flowed back and forth in the veins, conveying nourishment.

We saw in Chapter IV that anthropologists have been particularly struck by the difference between those features which we ourselves select for attention out of the whole representation, and the features which a participating consciousness selects. This seems to be well exemplified in the case of blood, as it appeared and was known before the seventeenth century. The medieval mind was not particularly interested in the mechanical part of the representation; on the other hand, it was much more vividly aware than we are of a qualitative difference between arterial blood and venous blood. Are we sure we are justified in ruling out the possibility that *participated* venous blood and participated arterial blood are to different kinds of fluid? It is indeed remarkable that earlier still, and down to the time of Galen, this was how it was imagined, and not as the same fluid ‘circulating’.

Harvey, on the other hand, was definitely interested in the *mechanism* of the heart—even to the extent of talking of the heart as ‘a piece of machinery in which, though one wheel gives motion to another, yet all the wheels seem to move simultaneously’. This enabled him ultimately to demonstrate the circulation of the blood. And his discovery, like many of the discoveries made in the non-mechanical sciences, had two clearly traceable consequences. On the one hand, it corrected a number of palpable mechanical errors—for instance, the belief that the air passed directly from the lungs to the heart, and that the blood flowed both ways through the veins. On the other hand, it contributed towards the bringing about of an exclusively mechanomorphic view of both blood and heart.

The second consequence took effect only gradually. Harvey himself still assumed the presence of vital spirits and he retained enough participating consciousness to write with enthusiasm on the subject of the heart as the central organ—like a sort of sun—of the human body. The like enthusiasm is observable in Copernicus writing of the ‘macrocosmic’ sun; and it is clear that a relation between the two was assumed by both men. For Harvey’s discovery of the circulation of the blood was based, quite consciously, upon two Aristotelian and medieval doctrines, namely, the participating and formal relation between macrocosm and microcosm to which I have already referred in this chapter, and the ‘perfection’ of circular motion to which I referred earlier in the book. Thus, the ousting of participation is not a *logical* consequence of a more accurate observation of the mechanical element in any representation; it is a practical one. If we are present at a church service, where a censer is swinging, we may either attend to the whole representation or we may select for attention the actual movement to and fro of the censer. In the latter case, if we are a Galileo,¹ we may discover the law of the pendulum. It is a good thing to discover the law of the pendulum. It is not such a good thing to lose, for that reason, all interest, and untimately even perception of, the incense whose savour it was the whole purpose of the pendulum to release. Participation ceases to be conscious precisely because we cease to attend to it. But, as already pointed out, participation does not cease to be a fact because it ceases to be conscious. It merely ceases to be what I have called ‘original’ participation.

From a slightly different point of view, all of this could be expressed by saying that words like *blood* and *heart* have shifted their meanings. In maintaining this, I shall of course be accused of confusing the word with the thing. But this is a fallacy. The real confusing lies hidden in the indictment. It is indeed possible, when thinking of the relation between words and things, to forget what ‘things’, that is phenomena, are; namely, that they are collective representations and, as such, correlative to human consciousness. But those who decline to adopt this expedient, will find it impossible to sever the ‘thing’ by a sort of surgical operation from its name. The relation between collective representations and language is of the most intimate nature; and if charges of muddled thinking are to be brought, I do not hesitate to say that the boot is on the other leg. those who insist that words and things are in two mutually exclusive categories of reality are simply confusing the phenomena with the particles. They are trying to think about the former as though they were the latter. Whereasm by definition, it is only the unrepresented which is independent of collective human consciousness and therefore of human language.

The word *blood* is a particularly striking example of such a shift of meaning, since it is a substance with which, as it swings to and from from heart and lung at the centre to visible complexion and sensitive skin at the periphery, we can still in some measure feel ourselves to be united by an extra-sensory link. We can, for example, both feel within ourselves and see through the curtain of another’s flesh how instantly it answers to fear and shame. Thus, we still participate ‘originally’ in our own blood up to the very moment when it becomes phenomenal by being shed. From that moment on, we abandon it to the mechanomorphism which characterizes all our phenomena. For us—that is, for our casual awareness, though not for our scientific concepts—there are really two kinds of blood: the shed and the unshed; rather as for Galen there were two kinds of blood, the venous and the arterial. Both of Galen’s were participated; whereas only *one* of ours is. We refer to what remains of that participation when we speak, with a psychological intention, of ‘bad blood’ or ‘hot blood’. We no longer distinguish where he did. We do distinguish where he did not, polarizing the old meaning of *blood* into two, a metaphorical and a literal one. And our medicine interests itself almost exclusively in the literal one, that it, in the idol.

>¹Actually it was not a censer, but a lamp in the Cathedral of Pisa which he was watching.

## XIII<br/>THE TEXTURE OF MEDIEVAL THOUGHT

Once the fact of participation is granted, the connection between words and things must, we have seen, be admitted to be at any time a very much closer one than the last two or three centuries have assumed. Conscious participation, moreover, will be aware of that connection; and original participation was conscious. It is only if we approach it in this light that we can hope to understand the extreme preoccupation of medieval learning with words—and with grammar, dialectic, rhetoric, logic and all that has to do with words. For words—and particularly nouns—were not then, and could not then be regarded as *mere* words. I ws taught in my first class at school to recite aloud with the rest of the class: ‘A noun is the name of anything,’ and the philosophers, from Plotinus to Aquinas, were wont to treat at the same time of the words and the things under the inclusive topic of ‘names’. Thus, Dionysius in his *De Divinis Nominibus*, and Aquinas in the 13th Quaestio of Part I of the *Summa* (‘concerning the names of God’) and in the little treatise *De Natura Verbi Intellectus* and elsewhere, are both concerned, not with philology but with epistemology and metaphysics.

In the last two chapters I have said a little of the world as it was for the common man and a little of the world as it was for science immediately before the scientific revolution. Now I am to say a little of the world as it was shown forth in philosophy. In all cases the plan of this book as well as the time at my disposal both for study and for writing, have determined that that little must be a very little indeed. I am only too well aware that a whole book, instead of a chapter, would not be too much to give to the philosophy alone of that lost world. Once again, it *is* a lost world—although the whole purpose of this book is to show that its spiritual wealth can be, and indeed, if incalculable disaster is to be avoided, *must* be regained. No good can come of any attempt to hark back to the original participation from which it sprang.

That lost world, then, was a world in which both phenomenon and name were felt as representations. On the one hand ‘the world conceived in the mind is representative of the whole of that which is realized in thought’ (*Verbum igitur in mente conceptum est repraesentativum omnis ejus quod acta intelligitur*).¹ But on the other hand the phenomenon itself only achieves full reality (*actus*) in the moment of being ‘named’ by man; that is, when that that in nature which it represents is united with that that in man which the name represents. Such naming, however, need not involve vocal utterance. For the nature or word is not mere sound, or mere ink. For Aquinas, as for Augustine, there are, anterior to the uttered word, the intellect-word, the heart-word and the memory-word (*verbum intellectus, verbum cordis, verbum memoriae*). The human word proceeds from the memory, as the Divine Word proceeds from the Father.² Proceeds from it, yet remains one with it. For the world is the thought of God realized through His Word. Thus, the Divine Word is also *forma exemplaris*;³ the phenomena are its representations;  as the human word is the representation of *intellectus in actu*. But, once again, the phenomenon itself only achieves its full reality (*actus*) in being named or thought by man; for thinking in act *is* the thing thought, in act; just as the senses in act, are the things sensed, in act. (*Intellectus in actu est intelligible in actu; sicut sensus in actu est sensible in actu*).⁴ And elsewhere St. Thomas expressly ratifies the dictum of Aristotle in his *De Anima*, that ‘the soul is in a manner all things’: (*Anima est quodammodo omnia*).⁵

It is against a background of thoughts like these, and of the collective representations on which they were based, that we must see the medieval conception of the Seven Liberal Arts, with Grammar at their head, followed immediately by Rhetoric and Dialectic. To learn about the true nature of words was at the same time to learn about the true nature of things. And it was the only way. We may reflect how the meaning of the word *grammar* itself has been polarized, since the scientific revolution, into the study of ‘mere’ words, on the one hand, and., on the other, into the half-magical *gramarye*, which altered its form to *glamour* and was useful for a season to the poets, before it was debased. One may reflect also on the frequent appearances made by Grammar and the other liberal arts, as persons, in medieval allegory, and how easily and naturally they mingle there with the strange figure of the Goddess Natura—at once so like and so unlike the Persephone of Greek mythology. This might easily lead us into a consideration of allegory itself—a literary form which is so little to our taste, and yet was so popular and all-pervasive in the Middle Ages. Is it not clear that *we* find allegory desiccated precisely because, for us, mere words are themselves desiccated—or rather because, for us, words are ‘mere’? For us, the characters in an allegory are ‘personified abstractions’. but for a man of the Middle Ages Grammar or Rhetoric, Mercy or ‘Daunger’, were real to begin with, simply *because* they were ‘names’. And names could be representations, in much the same solid-feeling way as things were.

For this very reason we are in some danger of confusing their allegory with the ‘symbolism’ in which we ourselves are again beginning to be interested, or at least judging them by the same standards. This is an error. Symbolism often expresses itself in language, as so much else does, though it can also express itself through other media. Yet the essence of symbolism is, not that words or names, as such, but that things or events themselves, are apprehended as representations. But this, as we have seen, is the normal way of apprehension for a participating consciousness. *Our* ‘symbolical’ therefore is an approximation to, or a variant of, *their* ‘literal’. Even when they got down to the bedrock of literal, they still experienced that rock as a representation. And so Aquinas, in dealing with the use of language in Holy Scripture, first divides its meaning into *literal* and *spiritual* and then subsumes the *allegorical* (and certain other) interpretations under the heading of *spiritual*. But when he comes to the *sensus parabolicus* (which is our ‘symbolical’) he includes it in the literal (*sub literali continetur*). When, for example, in the Bible, ‘the right arm of God’ is spoken of, ‘It is not the figure, but the figured which is the literal meaning’.⁶ All this will bear some meditation.

Indeed, to understand how the word ‘literal’ has changed its meaning is to understand the heart of the matter. For our problem is, precisely, to transport ourselves into the interior of minds, for which the *ordinary* way of looking at, and of thinking about, phenomena, was to look at and to think about them as appearances—representations. For which, therefore, knowledge was defined, not as the devising of hypotheses, but as an act of union with the represented behind the representation. And it is only by reconstructing in imagination, and not just in theory, the nature of the representations they confronted that we can hope really to understand the mode of their thinking. If we approach it from this end, instead of, as is usual, by way of our own representations and our own consequent distortions of the then meanings of their terms, then the Scholastic terminology does indeed spring into life for us—form and matter, *actus* and *potentia*, species, essence, existence, the active and the passive intelligence, and the rest. We must forget all about our ‘laws of nature’, those interposed, spectral hypotheses, before we can understand the ‘forms’ of medieval scholasticism. For the forms determined the appearances, not as laws do, but rather as a soul determines a body; and indeed the animal and human soul was defined as the ‘form’ of the body. We must forget all about causality, as we understand it, if we want to understand how the form was also *causa exemplaris*. But there is not anything to forget, for we have not even a transmuted survival, of that *actus:potentia* polarity, which was the very life-blood of Scholastic thought, central in its heart and manifest, through its capillaries, at all points of its surface organism. Being is potential existence; existence actualizes being. Yet, in the universe, *actus* preceded *potentia*; for out of potentiality a subject cannot be brought except by a being that is actual. The being of God is wholly actual, and is at the same time His existence; but, for creatures, it is only their *existence* which actualizes—actualizes not their own being, but the being of God, which they participate. Everywhere around us we must see creatures in a state of *potentia* being raised to *actus*: and yet, behind the appearances, the *actus* is already there.  What is the intellectual soul but the potentiality of determining the species of things? And what are the phenomena themselves? *Actually* the likenesses or representations of all sorts of ‘species’—bit *potentially* (that is, in the condition described as *in potentia*) immaterial in the soul itself.⁷ Phenomena and mind in perpetual interplay, with ‘species’ hovering somewhere between them as the moment in which the one becomes the other—*Anima enim quasi transformata est in rem per speciem*.⁸

‘Knowledge’, for such a consciousness, was conceived of as the perfection or completion of the ‘naming’ process of thought. In ordinary thinking or speaking, as in perception, the participation was a half-conscious process. But knowledge was an actual union with the represented behind the representation. ‘The knowledge of things that are, *is* the things;. (*Cognito eorum, quae sunt, ea, quae sunt, est*) wrote John Scotus Erigena in the ninth century, quoting Dionysius. ‘Nothing’, wrote Aquinas, ‘is known except truth—which is the same as being.’ (*nihil enim scitur nisi verum, quod cum ente convertitur*)⁹ Or, as a mean between *potentia* and *actus*, it was the process of actualization of the soul’s potentiality to become what it contemplated, and thus, a stage on its journey back to God. God’s own knowledge was alike the cause of all things and identical with His substance, and man participated in the being of God. Indeed, it was only by virtue of that participation that he could claim to *have* any being.

Now, participation as an actual *experience*, is only to be won for our islanded consciousness of to-day by special exertion. It is a matter, not of theorizing, but of ‘imagination’ in the genial or creative sense of the word, and therefore our first glimpse of it is commonly an aesthetic experience of some sort, derived from poetry or painting. And yet this experience, so foreign to our habit, is one which we positively must acquire and apply before we can hope to understand the thought of any philosopher earlier than the scientific revolution. Without it we shall not really understand what they mean when they use the commonest terms—species and genus, form and matter, subject and accident, cause and effect. Instead, we shall clumsily substitute a meaning of our own. In the work of Thomas Aquinas, in particular, the word *participate* or *participation* occurs almost on every page, and a whole book could be written—indeed one has been written¹⁰—on the uses he makes of it. It is not a technical term of philosophy and he is no more concerned to define it than a modern philosopher would be, to define some such common tool of his thought as, say, the word *compare*. Only in one passage, from the whole of his voluminous works, according to M. Geiger, did he feel it necessary to indicate its meaning, and this he did principally by illustrating it. Thus, after telling us that the species participates the genus, and the accident the subject, that matter participates form and effect participates cause, he gives us a glimpse of what all these participations signify to him, by adding: “Suppose we say that air participates the light of the sun, because it does not receive it in that clarity in which it is in the sun.”¹¹

At one end of the scale the subject participates its predicate¹²; at the other end, a formal or hierarchical participation *per similitudinem* was the foundation of the whole structure of the universe; for all creatures were in a greater or lesser degree images or represeentations, or ‘names’ of God, and their likeness or unlikeness did not merely measure, but *was* the nearer or more distant emanation of His Being and Goodness in them. It was a spiritual structure, and much of it lay beyond the world of appearance altogether. Angels, for example, are not simply the subject of a separate work, or a separate chapter of the *Summa*, but occur everywhere in it and are as likely to be referred to in a purely epistemological, as in a cosmological, context.

It will be well to point out here that, if I have concentrated on one particular medieval philosopher, rather than attempted a conspectus of the whole field of medieval philosophy or theories of knowledge, it is because that is the method which a history of consciousness, as distinct from a history of ideas, must adopt. It must attempt to penetrate into the very texture and activity of thought, rather than to collate conclusions. It is concerned, semantically, with the way in which words are used rather than with the product of discourse. Expressed in terms of logic, its business is more with the proposition than with the syllogism and more with the term than with the proposition. Therefore it must particularize. It must choose some one, or at best a few points, for its penetration. It is a question of making the best choice, and to me the best choice seemed to be the language and thought of Thomas Aquinas. I could probably have found more sensational illustrations of participation in, for example, Erigena or Albertus. For the Arabians, participation—with a particular intellectual emphasis—was so complete as practically to excluse individual human identity. I should, I think, have found fewer illustrations among the Nominalists, but they can fairly be regarded as forerunners of the scientific revolution, in whom the decline of participation cast its shadow before. Moreover, in the mind of Aquinas, with his enormous erudition, the whole corpus of medieval thought is in a manner recapitulated; and he is as sober as he is profound.

>¹ *Summa Theologica*, 12, Qu. 34. a. 3.

>² *De Differentia Divini Verbi et Humani; De Natura Verbi Intellectus*, etc.

>³ *Summa*, 12, Qu. 3, a. 8, ad 2.

>⁴ Ibid., 12, Qu. 12, a. 2. 3.

>⁵ Ibid., 12. Qu. 14. 2. I.

>⁶ *Summa*, 1a, Qu. 1, a. 10, ad 3. And cf. “p.75 above”

>⁷ Ibid., 1a, Qu. 79, a 4, ad 4.

>⁸ Aquinas, *De Natura Verbi Intellectus*.

>⁹ *Summa*, 1a, Qu. 1, a 1, 2.

>¹⁰ L.-B. Geiger, *La Participation dans la Philosophie de S. Thomas d’ Aquin.* Paris, 1942.

>¹¹ *De Hebdomadibus, cap. 2.

>¹² Cf. p.31

# XIV<br/>BEFORE AND AFTER THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION

For medieval man, then, the universe was a kind of theophany, in which he participated at different levels, in being, in thinking, in speaking or naming, and in knowing. And then—the evolutionary change began. Not, of course, at any given moment, but with anticipations, localized delays, individual differences. But no beginning is instantaneous—otherwise the very word ‘begin’ would be unnecessary and indeed meaningless. We need not pay too much attention to those historians who cautiously refuse to detect any process in history, because it is difficult to divide into periods, or because the periods are difficult to date precisely. The same objections apply to the process of growth from child to man. We should rather remind them that, if there is no process, there is in fact no such thing as history at all, so that they themselves must be regarded as mere chroniclers and antiquarians—a limitation which I cannot fancy they would relish. Moreover, the mental image, which they transfer to history, of a formless process determined by the chance impact of events, is itself, as we saw in Chapter IX, a product of the idolatry of the age of literalness.

However this may be, and whatever chronological limits we choose to assign to it, a change there certainly was. Professor Butterfield has commented well on it:

>through changes in the habitual use of words, certain things in the natural philosophy of Aristotle had now acquired a coarsened meaning or were actually misunderstood. It may not be easy to say why such a thing should have happened, but man unconsciously betray the fact that a certain Aristotelian thesis simply has no meaning for them any longer—they just cannot think of the stars and heavenly bodies as things without weight even when the books tell them to do so. Francis Bacon seems unable to say anything except that it is obvious that these heavenly bodies have weight, like any other kind of matter which we meet in our experience. Bacon says, furthermore, that he is unable to imagine the planets as nailed to crystalline spheres; and the whole idea only seems more absurd to him if the spheres in quetstion are supposed to be made of that liquid, aetherial kind of substance which Aristotle had in mind. Between the idea of a stone aspiring to reach its natural place at the centre of the universe—and rushing more fervently at it came nearer home—and the idea of a stone accelerating its descent under the constant force of gravity, there is an intellectual transition which involves a change in men’s feeling for matter.¹

We have seen that this change in men’s feeling for matter is merely one aspect of a much deeper and more fundamental change. And the change in men’s feeling for the nature of words and of thought was no whit less marked. Thus, the polarity of *actus* and *potentia* had carried perhaps half the weight of the philosophical thought of the Western mind through all the centuries that elapsed between Aristotle and Aquinas. A medieval philosopher would not have put the argument as I was obliged to do, when I said in Chapter III that there is ‘no such thing’ as unfelt solidity, just as there is no such thing as an unseen rainbow. He would have said that both the unsesn rainbow and the unfelt matter are *in potentia*. Yet this polarity, taken for granted for more than a thousand years by some of the acutest intellects the world has ever known—this polarity has become, for Bacon, a ‘frigida distinctio’—mere words! Again, in the *Novum Organum* he tells men bluntly that they ought not to think of ‘forms’ any more. They are really more like ‘laws’.

>It may be that nothing really exists except individual bodies, which produce real motion according to law; in science it is just that law, and the inquiry, discovery and explanation of it, which are the fundamental requisite both for the knowledge and for the control of Nature. And it is that law and its ‘clauses’, which *I* mean when I use (chiefly because of its current prevalence and familiarity) the word ‘forms’.²

*Causa exemplaris* is gone, in other words, and mechanical causality and the idols are already in sight.

If, with the help of some time-machine working in reverse, a man of the Middle Ages could be suddenly transported into the skin of a man of the twentieth century, seeing through our eyes and with our ‘figuration’ the objects we see, I think he would feel like a child who look for the first time at a photograph through the ingenious magic of a stereoscope. ‘Oh!”, he would say, ‘look how they *stend out!*’ We must not forget that in his time perspective had not yet been discovered, nor underrate the significance of this. True, it is no more than a device for pictorially representing depth, and separateness, in space. But how comes it that the device had never been discovered before—or, if discovered, never adopted? There were plenty of skilled artists, and they would certainly have hit upon it soon enough if depth in space had characterized the collective representations they wish to reproduce, as it characterizes ours. They did not need it. Before the scientific revolution the world was more like a garment men wore about them than a stage on which they moved. In such a world the convention of perspective was unnecessary. To such a world other conventions of visual reproduction, such as the nimbus and the halo, were as appropriate as to ours they are not. It was as if the observers were themselves *in* the picture. Compared with us, they felt themselves and the objects around them and the words that expressed those objects, immersed together in something like a clear lake of—what shall we say?—of ‘meaning’, if you choose. It seems the most adequate word. Aquinas’s *verbum intellectus* was *tanquam speculum, in quo res cernitur*³—’like a mirror in which the object is discerned’.

It happened that, at a time when I was studying the *De Natura Verbi Intellectus*, with that peculiar mixture of perplexity and delight which Thomas’s sentences arouse, when his thinking is at its intensest and tersest, I had the good fortune to receive from a friend the gift of a volume of his own poems. It seemed to me then, and it still seems to me now, that in one of them he has managed, without setting out to do so, to convey more vividly than I could ever hope to do, the qualitative difference between a participating outlook on the world, and our own. I therefore conclude my chapter with it.

>REFLECTION

>*When hill, tree, cloud, those shadowy forms<br/>Ascending heaven are seen,<br/>Their mindless beauty I from far<br/>Admire, a gulf between;*

>*Yet in the untroubled river when<br/>Their true ideas I find,<br/>That river, joined in trance with me,<br/>Becomes my second mind.*⁴

>¹ *Origins of Modern Science*, p. 104.

>² *Novum Organum*, II, 2. Author’s translation.

>³ *De Natura Verbi Intellectus*.

>⁴ George Rostrevor Hamilton. *The Carved Stone*. Heinemann. 1952.

# XV<br/>GRAECO-ROMAN AGE (MIND AND MOTION)

Earlier in this book, and particularly in Chapter X, attention was drawn to the difference between a history of thought or of ideas, on the one hand, and a history of consciousness on the other. I am of course aware that the various expressions of medieval thought which I have discussed in the last two chapters are usually explained in quite a different way. Where I have treated them as arising out of, and betokening, a slightly different relation between the mind of man and his phenomena—and that itself as implying slightly different phenomena—the ordinary view regards them purely and simply as a different ideology superimposed on phenomena which were in all respects the same as our own. By tracing this ideology through a chain of individual thinkers—Plato, Aristotle, the Neo-Platonists, Galen, Isidore of Seville, Vincent de Beauvais, Martanus Capella and others—the medieval outlook is presented as a stage in the history of (largely erroneous) ideas.

Now one outstanding thinker does, of course, pass on his ideas to others, and especially so in an age when books are few and hard to come by. There is, therefore, also a valid and significant history of ideas as such. But the irreconcilable conflict between the two approaches—if what we are seeking is a fundamentally *adequate* history of the human mind—becomes especially apparent when we look back, as I endeavoured to do in the last chapter, on the ideas which the Western mind has formed in the past about this very question, of its own relation to the phenomena, or in other words, when we survey its theories of knowledge. We must, then, make our choice. The whole basis of epistemology from Aristotle to Aquinas assumed participation.
