# The Force of Habit

## Owen Barfield

This is the third of the three lectures I have been so kindly invited to give in Vancouver. I believe the position is that some people are enjoying the high privilege of sitting through all three of them, while others are having to make do with two or even only one of the three. I don’t often come to Vancouver—not because I don’t want to, but because I happen to live about 6,000 miles away—and perhaps for that reason, when I came to prepare them, I couldn’t help thinking of the whole venture as a single project, and of the three lectures, even though not all given in the same place, as in come sense forming a single whole. I hope that unity is nevertheless a tri-unity—I have tried to make it so—and that any single one of the lectures has made, or will make some sense taken by itself. I shall be obliged, in this lecture, to refer at times to matters dealt with in the other two preceding ones, but I will try, with the help of a little unashamed repetition, to do so clearly and fully enough to meet at least the minimum requirements of those who did not hear them.

One of the points I tried to make, at some length, in the first lecture, which concerned the evolution of consciousness, was this: that it is a mistake—although it is a mistake that we nearly all make all the time, and we all make nearly all the time—to imagine that inward and immaterial component of the totality we call “the world” as being a sort of something located and confined inside our heads. Perhaps I should pause here to acknowledge the existence of some who tell us they easily avoid that mistake, because they go one step further and deny that there is any such experience as consciousness—or indeed any such experience as experience. There is the brain, they say, and there is the rest of the world that is not the brain, and there is a causal relation between them. But I should be wasting your time by paying them further attention, since such a position is only open to people who are incapable of distinguishing between one idea and another quite different idea; in this case, between what is meant by “perceiving” (which is an idea) and what is meant by “being perceptable” (which is a totally other idea).

There is however another pair, the clear distinction between which can be lost sight of even by the intelligent. In this case they both lie *within* the realm of inner experience, or consciousness, and they are called respectively “perceiving” and “thinking.” The distinction between the two is primary and fundamental—axiomatic, if you like—because at any moment we choose we can make it a matter of immediate experience. It is nevertheless a distinction which it is rather easy to lose sight of, once we begin to reflect or philosophize, for this reason: that the single experience we call “consciousness”—our inwardness at any moment—is not composed either of perceiving alone or of thinking alone, but of an immemorial and inextricable combination of the two. Indeed it is better to call it an interpenetration rather than a combination. We soon learn, once we begin to reflect, that what we have been accustomed to refer to in everyday speech as “perceiving”—as for instance when we speak of perceiving a chair or a blackboard, or for that matter a neuron or a chromosome—is in fact perception heavily laced with thinking, with habitual thought, with mental habit. It is impossible to separate the one from the other. And I was concerned to emphasize, in that lecture, that the fact of our being unable to separate them (as for instance, we can actually separate the salt in the sea from the water in the sea) is no good reason for ceasing to distinguish clearly between them. On the contrary, for it is just when we maintain the distinction, while realizing the interpenetration, that we are forced to the conclusion, which I will quote from the same lecture, that “Consciousness is not a tiny bit of the world stuck on the the rest of it. It is the inside of the whole world; or, if we are using the term in its stricter sense—excluding therefore the subconscious mind—then it is *part* of the inside of the whole world.”

I must apologize for this hurried run-through of the groundwork. If you are interested but not convinced, you can easily pursue it yourselves at leisure—and without going into phenomenology and all that—by reading, for instance, a little book called *The Sciences and the Humanities* by W. T. Jones,¹ or even the opening chapters of my own book, *Saving the Appearances*. It was put a little differently by the writer of an article in the *Harvard Review*: “We can see that there really is no outside world and no inside world. There is just one world.’ The title of the article, to which I will return, is “Our ‘Polar Partnership’ with the World around Us.”²

Now if you are, or if you become convinced, that what we perceive is inseparable from how we think, which is the same as saying that the world around us is inseparable from the way we think—though it is certainly not *indistinguishable* from it—then a lot of things follow. One of them is the privilege of discovering how very differently mankind as a whole used to think in the remote past. By that I do not mean simply that they did not for the most part think analytically, logically, causally. Many anthropologists and others have discovered that, without however making the discovery I am referring to. I mean that the thoughts themselves were images rather than concepts. And this entails that the world they lived in was different from the world we live in today. It would be as true, perhaps truer, to say that they *perceived* images as to say that they thought them. What we perveive as things they perceived as images, and it is this discovery which enables us to grasp the distinction between the history of ideas and the history of consciousness.

The difference between an image and a thing lies in 

p. 69

>¹ Berkeley: Universtiy of California Press, 1967

>² January-February 1978
