# The Rediscovery of Meaning
## Owen Barfield

Amid all the menacing signs that surround us in the middle of the twentieth century, perhaps the one which fills thoughtful people with the greatest foreboding is the growing general sense of meaninglessness. It is this which underlies most of the other threats. How is it that the more able man becomes to manipulate the world to his advantage, the less he can perceive any meaning in it? This is a paradox which has often been noted and has sometimes been attributed to a fundamental perversity, a sort of “pure cussedness,” in human nature. In face, however, it arises from a clearly identifiable and comparatively recent bit of history.

Most people are well aware that, with the advent of the Scientific Revolution about three hundred years ago, the mind of man began to relate itself to the world around it in an entirely new way. The habit then first arose of meticulously observing the facts of nature and systematically interpreting them in terms of physical cause and effect; and this habit has been growing ever since, with encalculable and largely beneficial results for the accumulation of practical knowledge, or knowledge enabling the manipulation of nature. What is less clearly realized is the precise nature and significance of a certain further step which was taken in the nineteenth century. It was then that this habitual practice in the pursuit of knowledge was formulated as a dogma under the name of the “positive” philosophy, or positivism.

Positivism is the philosophical name for the belief now more widely known as “materialism.” It is the doctrine —propounded originally by Auguste Comte—that the above-mentioned method of interpreting the facts of nature is not merely a useful but not the only possible one. Obviously a proposition that only one method of scientific investigation is possible cannot itself (except for devout believers) be based on scientific investigation by that method. The proposition is, therefore, in fact a dogmatic belief; although it has been so thoroughly absorbed into the thought stream of Western humanity that it has come to be regarded, not as a dogma, but as a scientifically established fact.


